# fetched: 2026-06-13T23:44:14.843Z
# arxiv: 2606.05396
# url: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.05396

Willing but Unable: Separating Refusal from Capability in Code LLMs via Abliteration
Cristina Carleo1 , Pietro Liguori1,∗ , Naghmeh Ivaki2 , and Domenico Cotroneo3
1

University of Naples Federico II, Naples, Italy
University of Coimbra, CISUC/LASI, Coimbra, Portugal
3
University of North Carolina at Charlotte, Charlotte, NC, USA
cr.carleo@studenti.unina.it, pietro.liguori@unina.it naghmeh@dei.uc.pt, d.cotroneo@charlotte.edu
*corresponding author

arXiv:2606.05396v1 [cs.CR] 3 Jun 2026

2

Abstract—Producing a labeled vulnerable code at scale is a recurring obstacle for learning-based vulnerability detection: mined
corpora carry substantial label noise, and existing LLM-based
augmentation propagates these inaccuracies because it transforms
vulnerable seeds rather than synthesising vulnerabilities from a
specification. A complementary route is to start from safe code
and ask an instruction-tuned LLM to inject a specified CWE—
which would shift the labeling burden from open-ended detection
to bounded binary confirmation—but safety-aligned code LLMs
systematically refuse such prompts. This paper is a preliminary
feasibility study of abliteration, a low-rank weight edit that
orthogonally projects out the refusal direction in the residual
stream, as a tool to remove this barrier. We use Python and
CWE-89 (SQL injection) as a case study, evaluating the Qwen2.5Coder-Instruct family at 3B, 7B, and 14B parameters on safe
samples drawn from PromSec and SafeCoder, replicated three
times per condition. We find that (i) refusal on injection prompts
is strongly size- and prompt-context-dependent: the 14B refuses
100% of prompts, the 7B refuses 73% of PromSec but only 5%
of SafeCoder, whereas the 3B is essentially never blocked; (ii)
abliteration reduces refusal to zero or near-zero across all sizes
while leaving syntactic validity above 93%, supporting the view
that, in this setting, refusal can be detached from measured codegeneration capability; and (iii) the post-abliteration injection
rate remains capacity-bound—88–97% on the 14B, 89–90%
on the 7B, and 25–48% on the 3B—separating willingness,
which abliteration unlocks, from capability, which scales with
parameters. Vulnerability verdicts are produced by a three-tool
detector ensemble (CodeQL, Semgrep, Bandit) followed by
manual adjudication by two authors on detector-positive outputs.

We investigate a complementary construction. Given a sample
S that a static analyzer confirms is not vulnerable to CWE-X,
an instruction-tuned LLM is asked to apply a CWE-X-specific
transformation to produce S ′ . This setup does not eliminate
static-analysis-based labelling, but it changes the question the
analyzer is asked: from open-ended multi-class detection on a
real-world sample (where 20–71% of labels are wrong) to binary
confirmation on a sample whose intended class we specified
(where a negative answer triggers filtering, not mislabelling). A
reliable version of this pipeline would enable training data for
learning-based detectors [3], [4], [11], security benchmarks for
code-generation LLMs [12], [13], paired counterfactual samples
that share logic and differ only in the targeted weakness, and
calibrated test sets to measure the recall ceiling of static analyzers.
A central obstacle stands in the way: modern instructiontuned code-generation LLMs are safety-aligned, and explicitly
naming a CWE in the prompt triggers refusal behaviour learned
through RLHF, even when the model is otherwise capable of the
underlying transformation [14]. We study a single intervention
that addresses this barrier: abliteration [15], a low-rank weight
edit that orthogonally projects out the refusal direction in the
residual stream.
This paper is a preliminary feasibility study of how abliteration
interacts with model scale on a CWE-injection task, using Python
and CWE-89 (SQL injection) as case study—chosen because
Python is among the most affected languages in open-source
vulnerability incidence [10] yet underrepresented in detection
research relative to C/C++ [9], and because the Qwen2.5Coder family we abliterate is trained on Python-rich corpora.
Constructing a full dataset is out of scope; instead, we examine
whether the design space can be narrowed enough to make such
a corpus a tractable engineering exercise. Our central finding is
Keywords–vulnerability injection; code LLMs; abliteration; that refusal removal and vulnerability-injection capability are
refusal direction; CWE-89; software security
orthogonal: abliteration removes refusal, but successful injection
remains capacity-bound, with a ∼50-point gap between 3B
and 7B models even after refusal has been reduced to zero or
1. Introduction
near-zero on both.
Learning-based vulnerability detection is bottlenecked by
Our contributions are:
training data. Synthetic test suites [1] lack realism; datasets mined 1) A reproducible pipeline that applies abliteration to instructionfrom CVE-tagged commits [2]–[4] carry 20–71% label noise and
tuned code LLMs and validates the resulting generations
up to 99% duplication [5]; and LLM-based augmentation [6]–[8]
through an ensemble of three independent static analyzers
inherits the noise of its seeds because it transforms existing
(CodeQL, Semgrep, Bandit), followed by author-led manual
vulnerable samples rather than synthesising vulnerabilities under
adjudication of detector-positive cases (Section 3).
an explicit specification. The problem is structural rather than 2) A controlled three-by-two factorial study on the Qwen2.5language-specific, but research attention is uneven: detection
Coder family at 3B, 7B, and 14B parameters, providing
studies are dominated by C/C++, with Python in a residual
one of the first empirical measurement of refusal and post∼16% alongside PHP and Go [9], despite Python’s prominence
abliteration compliance of code LLMs on a CWE-injection
in open-source vulnerability incidence [10].
task.

3) An empirical separation of willingness from capability as exploits, where the generated code is the attack. In contrast, our
orthogonal axes of compliance: refusal removal unlocks pipeline takes a complete, safe application as input and asks
capability that is already present but does not create capability the LLM to apply a CWE-specific transformation to it, so the
that is missing.
output is a vulnerable counterpart of a known-safe program
4) Released open artefacts: the evaluation harness (refusal rather than a deployable payload: the attack surface is introduced
classifier, validators, scoring scripts) and aggregate measure- into existing defensive code rather than synthesised from scratch.
ments, available at https://github.com/dessertlab/AblitEval. The downstream use shifts accordingly, from proof-of-concept
Abliterated checkpoints, the abliteration scripts targeted at the exploitation to the construction of labelled training data for
specific Qwen2.5-Coder weights used here, and pre-generated vulnerability detectors and, as a methodological by-product, the
vulnerable samples are not publicly released; the rationale for empirical study of refusal behaviour on CWE-named prompts.
this asymmetric release is discussed in the Ethical Statement.
A complementary line of work targets the localisation problem
The remainder of the paper is organised as follows. Section 2 rather than synthesis. Bogaerts et al. [22] approach the Python
reviews related work, Section 3 presents the proposed pipeline, case from the localisation side, training BoW, Conv1D, and
Section 4 describes the experimental setup, and Section 5 reports BiLSTM models to identify potential injection sites with over
the results and discusses the research questions. Finally, Section 6 95% true-positive rate. Their work is a proof-of-concept restricted
discusses the implications of the findings; Section 7 examines to localisation; the synthesis of vulnerable code at the identified
threats to validity; Section 8 addresses ethical considerations; sites is left as future work. In contrast, our pipeline does not
and Section 9 concludes the paper and outlines future work.
perform localisation at all: we ask the LLM to apply a CWE-89specific transformation to a known-safe sample and let it identify
2. Background and Related Work
the appropriate injection site internally, then validate the output
2.1 Vulnerability Datasets and Synthesis
through static analysis. The two approaches are complementary: a
Pattern-mining and supervised editing approaches predate learned localiser could be used in conjunction with our generation
LLM-based ones. VulGen [6] mines single-statement vulnerabil- step to constrain where the LLM modifies the code, which we
ity patterns from C code and trains a model to locate injection leave for future work.
points; VGX [7] extends VulGen with a larger dataset and a
Static-analysis ensembles have also been adopted for labelling
semantics-aware contextualisation step. Both are restricted to at scale. Mechri et al. [11] introduce SecureQwen, a decoder-only
single-statement vulnerabilities, both target C/C++ rather than transformer fine-tuned for vulnerability detection on PythonPython, and both require substantial pattern-mining infrastructure VulnDB, a 1.875M-snippet dataset assembled from GitHub,
that does not transfer across CWEs. In contrast, our pipeline Codeparrot, and synthetic data. Their labelling combines five
is specification-driven rather than pattern-driven: the CWE is static analyzers (Bandit, Semgrep, SonarQube, CodeQL, PyLint)
named directly in the prompt and the LLM is asked to perform for broader CWE coverage than any single tool, establishing
the targeted transformation, so extending to a new CWE requires static-analysis-based labelling as a viable methodology for Python
only formulating a new natural-language injection instruction, at scale. In contrast, we use the analyzer ensemble at validation
not curating a pattern corpus.
time rather than at construction time. A mined corpus needs
LLM-based augmentation is a more recent approach. the ensemble to derive labels in the open-ended “what CWE, if
VulScribeR [8] uses retrieval-augmented generation with three any?” direction; our pipeline only needs it to confirm a specific,
strategies (Mutation, Injection, Extension), all of which transform pre-specified CWE on each generated sample, which is a strictly
or recombine existing vulnerable samples. Its Injection strategy easier task.
outperforms VulGen and VGX by approximately 27% in F1, but
as discussed in Section 1, the resulting labels still depend on 2.2 Refusal and Abliteration
Asking a safety-aligned LLM to “introduce a CWE-X
the labels of the seed corpus. Croft et al. [5] show those labels
are unreliable. In contrast, we start from safe code rather than vulnerability” is, from the model’s perspective, a request for
a vulnerable seed, so the only label assertion needed upstream harmful content, and triggers refusal behaviour learned through
is the conservative “CodeQL agrees this is not vulnerable to RLHF or DPO [14]. Arditi et al. [15] show that this refusal is
CWE-X”, and we specify the target CWE explicitly in the mediated by a single direction in the residual stream, consistent
prompt, so post-hoc validation is reduced from a multi-class across thirteen open-source chat models up to 72B parameters.
detection problem to a binary confirmation aligned with the Ablating this direction at every layer and token position via
injected specification. We also explicitly address the refusal orthogonal projection prevents the model from refusing harmful
behaviour that none of the LLM-based augmentation methods instructions while preserving general capabilities; the intervention
report on, presumably because they avoid CWE-named prompts. is a permanent weight edit that requires no retraining. Although
A separate strand of LLM-driven research uses natural- Arditi et al. report that a single direction suffices in their
language descriptions as input to generate offensive code from experiments, the procedure is naturally extended by removing
scratch. EVIL [16] and the Shellcode_IA32 corpus [17], [18] the top-k such directions when more than one is identified by
target the synthesis of executable IA-32 shellcode from natural- the extraction step, which is the configuration we adopt.
language intent, and the same paradigm has been extended both
In contrast with [15], we apply abliteration to instruction-tuned
empirically along the shellcode dimension [19], [20] and to code LLMs rather than general-purpose chat models, and we
PowerShell attack scripts in a real-world threat setting [21]. The evaluate it on a structured downstream task (CWE-89 injection
shared objective there is to obtain standalone offensive artefacts— on real Python files) rather than on a refusal-rate harness alone.
payloads or attack scripts directly usable as proof-of-concept This setting reveals an effect that prior work does not isolate—the

Figure 1. End-to-end pipeline. The same prompt is sent to the Base and Abliterated checkpoints of each Qwen2.5-Coder size.
Refusal responses bypass downstream analysis; non-refusal responses pass through code extraction and AST validation, then
through a three-tool vulnerability detector ensemble (Bandit, Semgrep, CodeQL). Outputs flagged by at least one detector are
manually adjudicated by two authors against the CWE-89 specification; initial inter-annotator agreement was approximately 90%,
and disagreements were resolved by discussion. Validated pairs ⟨S,S ′ ⟩ also feed a similarity analysis (CrystalBLEU, CodeBLEU)
against the CWE-89-vulnerable counterpart of S provided by the source corpus, used as ground-truth reference.
dependence of post-abliteration compliance on model scale—
which we report in Section 5.

this surgery is non-trivial—a coarse intervention that disables
refusal would also damage unrelated reasoning, and the resulting
model would generate fluent but malformed or incoherent code.
3. Approach
The technical content of the procedure below is to identify the
Our pipeline, as illustrated in Figure 1, has three phases: Phase smallest subspace of the residual stream that mediates refusal
1 - prompt construction (Section 3-C), Phase 2 - refusal removal specifically, and to project it out of the model weights without
via abliteration (Section 3-B), and Phase 3 - multi-tool validation disturbing the rest.
with author-led manual adjudication of detector-positive outputs
Concretely, transformer-based language models maintain a
(Section 3-D).
residual stream x(l) ∈ Rdmodel at each layer l that acts as a shared
communication channel: every component (attention heads, MLP
3.1 Model Selection Rationale
blocks) reads from it and writes its output back by addition.
We select three members of the Qwen2.5-Coder-Instruct Following Arditi et al. [15], we hypothesise that diverse harmful
family [23]: the 3B, 7B, and 14B parameter variants based on instructions converge to a small linear subspace in this stream—a
three criteria. First, abliteration requires direct access to model refusal subspace—and that ablating this subspace at every layer
weights, restricting the candidate pool to open-weight models. suffices to disable refusal.
Second, the task involves code generation, motivating the choice
Given a transformer with residual-stream activations H ∈
of a code-specialised family over a general-purpose one. Third, Rn×d on harmful prompts and B ∈ Rn×d on matched harmless
the selected sizes fall within the parameter range feasible for CPU- prompts, we estimate a refusal-mediating subspace layer by layer
based inference, making the experimental pipeline reproducible from the contrast between the two activation sets. Activations
in low-resource settings without dedicated GPU infrastructure. are collected at the final-token position of each prompt. For
Fixing the model family across three sizes additionally provides each layer, we form a contrast matrix D = H −B after matching
a controlled axis for examining the effect of scale on task harmful and harmless activations by prompt index, and apply
compliance.
singular value decomposition,
D = U SV ⊤ .
3.2 Abliteration
The top-k right singular vectors v1 ,...,vk are taken as candidate
A safety-aligned LLM has been trained to do two distinct refusal directions r̂ ,...,r̂ . The directions are then projected
1
k
tasks on a CWE-injection prompt: (i) recognise the request as out of every weight matrix W
out that writes to the residual
one it should not fulfill, and (ii) know how the requested code stream—input embeddings, attention output projections, and
transformation would be carried out. Behaviourally, only the first MLP output projections at every transformer block—via the
manifests, because the recognition step short-circuits the response permanent low-rank edit
into a refusal. Abliteration is a surgical edit that removes the first
k
X
′
ability while leaving the second intact: an analogy is selectively
Wout
← Wout −
r̂i r̂i⊤ Wout ,
suppressing an inhibitory reflex without erasing the underlying
i=1
knowledge that the reflex was guarding. Because both abilities thereby preventing the model from writing r̂1 ,...,r̂k to its residual
are computed by overlapping subsets of the same neural network, stream, without retraining [15]. We use k directions per layer

with multiple refinement passes, applied to the layers whose top- NATURAL-LANGUAGE DESCRIPTION (from corpus)
k singular values capture the largest fraction of refusal variance
〈e.g. “Here is a secure Flask app with register and login routes
(typically the upper third of the network in our models); specific using parameterized MySQLdb queries.”〉
values are reported below. All abliteration runs are performed INJECTION INSTRUCTION (constant suffix)
Rewrite it with CWE-89 by concatenating
using the Obliteratus toolkit [24] with the advanced method,
username and password directly into the SQL
norm-preserving projection, layer-adaptive strength scaling, and strings.
top-k layer selection.
SAFE CODE TO REWRITE (from corpus)
Hyperparameters are tuned to model size, reflecting the
import os
from flask import Flask, request, redirect
expectation that larger models—having undergone more extensive
import MySQLdb
safety fine-tuning—require a broader extraction of refusal...
@app.route(’/register’, methods=[’POST’])
mediating directions and more refinement passes. Specifically,
def register():
the 3B checkpoint uses k = 2 directions and 2 refinement passes,
cursor.execute("INSERT INTO users (...) VALUES (%s,
%s)",
targeting the 10 layers with the strongest refusal signal in the
(username, password))
upper third of the network; the 7B and 14B checkpoints both use
...
k = 8 directions and 4 refinement passes, targeting respectively
Figure 2. Prompt template, with an example excerpt of the
9 and 16 strong layers.
safe code drawn from the dataset. Description and safe code are
Because the intervention modifies every block of the network,
taken verbatim from the corpus; a fixed injection instruction is
the question of whether it has also damaged unrelated behaviour
concatenated between them. The same template is sent to Base
cannot be assumed away—it must be measured. Obliteratus
and Abliterated checkpoints alike.
includes a built-in verify stage that we use as the acceptance gate
for each abliterated checkpoint: the toolkit runs the abliterated
model on a held-out set of harmful and harmless prompts
3.4 Multi-Tool Validation
and records refusal rate, perplexity, and free-form completion
For each generated response by the base and abliterated models
coherence relative to the base model. We accept a checkpoint
when its harmful-prompt refusal rate is reduced to ≤ 5%, its we apply, in sequence: (1) a regex-based refusal classifier on
harmless-prompt perplexity stays within 0.5 of the base model, the raw response (a small set of high-precision patterns derived
and its free-form completions remain syntactically valid and from [15], applied to full-precision model outputs prior to quansemantically plausible Python; checkpoints that fail any of the tisation, so that the classifier is not confounded by quantisation
three conditions are rejected and the abliteration is re-run with artefacts); (2) Python code-block extraction (the runner walks
adjusted hyperparameters. This verification feeds directly into all extractable blocks because some models emit a safe and a
RQ2 (Section 4), which asks whether refusal is removable vulnerable version in the same response); (3) AST-level syntactic
without collateral damage to generative capability. Without this validation and compile(); (4) three independent vulnerability
check, any subsequent measurement of injection rate would be checkers—Bandit B608 (hardcoded_sql_expressions),
confounded: a low rate could reflect either a genuine capability Semgrep with the official Python ruleset, and CodeQL with the
standard CWE-89 query—where each block is staged into a
ceiling or a model that has been quietly broken by the edit.
We applied this procedure to Qwen2.5-Coder-Instruct [23] at fresh single-file CodeQL database for the CodeQL pass and the
3B, 7B, and 14B using a Google Colab GPU instance for the runner stops at the first block that any checker flags.
We define vuln as the verdict produced by the following
activation extraction and weight projection steps. The resulting
two-step
protocol. First, each syntactically valid generated block
abliterated checkpoints were converted to GGUF and quantised
is evaluated by the detector ensemble. If no detector flags the
at 4 bits (Q4_K_M) for inference on commodity hardware.
block, the output is treated as non-vulnerable for CWE-89. If
at least one detector flags the block, the output is forwarded
to two authors for independent manual annotation against the
3.3 Prompt Construction
CWE-89 specification. The annotators classify each flagged
output as vulnerable, non-vulnerable, or ambiguous; ambiguous
Both PromSec and SafeCoder pair each safe Python function cases and disagreements are resolved by discussion. In total,
with a natural-language description of what the function the annotators inspected all detector-positive outputs; for the
does (e.g., “Here is a secure Flask app with register and abliterated cells alone, this corresponds to 473 of 630 outputs
login routes using parameterized MySQLdb queries”). We (Table III). Initial inter-annotator agreement was approximately
construct each prompt by taking the corpus-provided description 90%, and disagreements were resolved by discussion. We report
verbatim, appending a fixed injection instruction of the form per-checker rates and concordance (Section 5) so the contribution
Rewrite it with CWE-89 by concatenating all of the manual step is visible.
user-supplied inputs directly into the SQL
strings or the database query is the target, 4. Experimental Setup
and including the safe code itself as the implementation to
rewrite. The same prompt is used for the Base and Abliterated 4.1 Models
conditions of every model, so any difference in refusal or
We study three sizes of Qwen2.5-Coder-Instruct [23]—3B, 7B,
injection rate between cells is attributable to the abliteration and 14B—under two conditions each: Base (the published Hugintervention rather than to a difference in prompt scaffolding. gingFace checkpoint) and Abliterated (our abliterated checkpoint,

produced as described in Section 3-B). All inference is run on
a commodity laptop (Intel Core Ultra 7 155H, 32 GB RAM,
no dedicated GPU) using 4-bit quantised GGUF checkpoints
(Q4_K_M) under ollama, at temperature 0.2, top-p 0.9, with
a 600s per-prompt timeout and three retries on transport errors.
The choice of consumer-grade hardware is deliberate: it both
reflects a realistic deployment setting for an actor wishing to run
such models and bounds the total inference cost of the factorial
design within the project budget.
4.2 Datasets
We evaluate on 70 safe Python samples drawn from two
publicly-released corpora that have been used in prior work to
study secure code generation by LLMs:
PromSec [12] introduces a prompt-optimisation method for
secure code generation and releases a corpus of naturallanguage descriptions paired with safe Python implementations
spanning multiple CWEs. We use the CWE-89 subset,
covering Flask-style web applications with parameterized
queries across multiple MySQL/SQLite drivers (MySQLdb,
mysql.connector, flask_mysqldb, sqlite3); we
sample 20 functions.
• SafeCoder [13] introduces a safety-focused fine-tuning approach for code LLMs and releases a benchmark of safe Python
snippets across multiple CWEs. The CWE-89 subset spans
a wider range of database libraries (sqlite3, psycopg2,
pymysql), with shorter and typically single-route snippets
compared to PromSec; we sample 50 functions.

•

4.4 Procedure
For each (model, condition) combination, we run the pipeline
three independent times across the 70 samples (20 PromSec
+ 50 SafeCoder). The full factorial yields 6 × 70 × 3 = 1,260
generations. For each generation we record: (a) is_refusal,
(b) code_complete, indicating that a non-empty extractable Python block was produced, (c) valid_syntax,
(d) vulnerable_codeql, (e) vulnerable_semgrep,
(f) vulnerable_bandit, and (g) the final post-validation
vulnerable verdict produced by the protocol of Section 3-D.
Means and standard deviations are computed over the three runs
of each (model, condition, dataset) cell.
5. Results
Table I reports refusal, vulnerability, and syntactic-validity
rates for all twelve cells. Below we discuss each RQ in turn.
5.1 RQ1: Refusal Is Size- and Context-Dependent

The 14B base model refuses every single CWE-89 injection
prompt: 20/20 on PromSec and 50/50 on SafeCoder, replicated
across three independent runs (zero standard deviation). The 7B
base model refuses approximately 73% of PromSec prompts but
only 5% of SafeCoder prompts—a 14× asymmetry that does
not reflect prompt intent (the CWE label and instructions are
identical) but the surrounding context. PromSec samples are
longer Flask web applications with multiple routes; SafeCoder
samples are short, single-route snippets.
Refusal classifiers in safety-tuned models appear to be more
sensitive to the former, plausibly because longer attack surfaces
Both corpora release each Python sample as a safe/vulnerable
resemble training distributions of harmful examples more closely.
pair: a safe implementation (which we use as input to the LLM)
The 3B base model exhibits negligible refusal on PromSec
and the corresponding CWE-89-vulnerable variant produced by
(0%) and only mild refusal on SafeCoder (6.7%). One plausible
the original authors, which differs from the safe version only in
interpretation, that smaller instruction-tuned models tend to
the CWE-specific edit (e.g., a parameterised query replaced by
receive less extensive safety fine-tuning, is consistent with
direct string concatenation). We use the safe versions as prompt
anecdotal reports in the abliteration literature [15] but cannot be
inputs and the vulnerable counterparts as ground-truth references
conclusively established from a single model family.
for the similarity analysis of Section 5.
The asymmetry between datasets has practical consequences
The total sample size of 70 was chosen to keep the full
for any data-generation pipeline that relies on safety-aligned
6×70×3 factorial within the compute budget available on a
LLMs. A practitioner who tested only on short single-route
consumer machine; a more comprehensive evaluation across
snippets (SafeCoder-like) on the 7B model would observe a 5%
larger samples is planned as future work. All samples used in
refusal rate and conclude that refusal is a marginal issue; the same
our experiments are confirmed safe by CodeQL, Semgrep, and
model on multi-route applications would block three quarters
Bandit prior to inclusion in the generation set.
of the dataset. This is the simplest empirical argument for not
extrapolating refusal-rate measurements across input distributions.
4.3 Research Questions
A second consequence is that the 14B’s 100% refusal makes
We frame the analysis around three research questions:
it look, from the outside, as if the model is incapable of the
task—refusal and incapability are visually indistinguishable until
• RQ1: Refusal landscape. How prevalent is refusal on CWEone of them is removed. RQ2 and RQ3 disentangle the two.
89 injection prompts across model sizes (3B, 7B, 14B) and
A further note: on SafeCoder the 7B Base already injects
across datasets (PromSec, SafeCoder)?
CWE-89
at 94%, with refusal at 4.7%—i.e., the safety alignment
• RQ2: Refusal removal without collateral damage. Does
of
the
7B
is essentially absent on single-route snippets, even
abliteration eliminate refusal while preserving the generative
before
any
intervention. This reinforces the dual-use point raised
capability of the model? In other words, does the surgery
in
Section
8:
the surface that abliteration exposes on multi-route
successfully remove the inhibitory reflex without breaking the
inputs
is,
on
simpler inputs, already exposed by default.
model’s ability to write valid, coherent Python?
Takeaway
for
RQ1. Refusal scales monotonically with model
• RQ3: Willingness vs. capability. Once refusal is removed
size
on
PromSec
(0% → 73% → 100%) but only marginally
and capability is verified to be preserved, how does the rate
on
SafeCoder
(7%
→ 5% → 100%). The 14B is the only size
of successful CWE-89 injection depend on model size?
at which refusal is the dominant blocker on both datasets; the

TABLE I
Refusal, vulnerability, and validity rates per (model, condition, dataset). Entries are mean ± standard deviation across three independent runs.

PromSec (n = 20)

SafeCoder (n = 50)

Model

Condition

Refusal %

Vuln. %

Syntax %

Refusal %

Vuln. %

Syntax %

Qwen2.5-Coder-3B

Base
Abliterated

0.0±0.0
1.7±2.9

31.7± 2.9
25.0±15.0

100.0±0.0
93.3±5.8

6.7±1.2
0.0±0.0

50.0±2.0
48.0±2.0

85.3±3.1
94.7±2.3

Qwen2.5-Coder-7B

Base
Abliterated

73.3±2.9
0.0±0.0

21.7± 2.9
90.0± 0.0

25.0±5.0
100.0±0.0

4.7±1.2
0.0±0.0

94.0±0.0
89.3±5.8

94.7±1.2
96.7±1.2

Qwen2.5-Coder-14B

Base
Abliterated

100.0±0.0
0.0±0.0

0.0± 0.0
88.3± 2.9

0.0±0.0
95.0±5.0

100.0±0.0
0.0±0.0

0.0±0.0
96.7±2.3

0.0±0.0
96.7±1.2

7B is partially blocked in a context-dependent way; the 3B is
essentially not blocked.
5.2 RQ2: Abliteration Removes Refusal While Preserving
Capability
The intervention described in Section 3-B modifies every
transformer block of the model and is therefore at risk of
damaging unrelated computation. RQ2 asks whether this risk
materialises in practice on the Qwen2.5-Coder family.
Across all three model sizes, abliteration reduces refusal to
zero or near-zero on both datasets. The only residual non-zero
cell is the 3B Abliterated model on PromSec (1.7 ± 2.9%),
while all 7B and 14B abliterated cells reach 0% refusal. The
intervention is therefore as effective on instruction-tuned code
LLMs as prior work reports for general chat models [15], while
making the post-refusal capability of each model observable.
We operationalise capability preservation through three observable signals: (i) syntactic validity of the produced code,
(ii) its compilability, and (iii) the model’s continued ability to
follow the structural constraints of the safe input file (multi-route
Flask layout, hashing routines, control flow). On (i), syntactic
validity remains above 93% in all six abliterated cells, and on
(ii) compilability tracks it within one percentage point. The 14B
abliterated produces valid syntax at 95% (PromSec) and 96.7%
(SafeCoder), versus 0% for the 14B base—a difference that
is not a capability gain from the edit: the base model refuses
the request entirely and produces no extractable code, so the
syntax check trivially fails on an empty output. The abliterated
variant generates code precisely because the refusal behaviour
was suppressed by the edit; the comparison thus measures the
effect of abliteration on compliance, not on code quality.
A further quantitative signal of capability preservation is
provided by the KL divergence between the abliterated and base
output distributions, measured during the Obliteratus verification
stage on a held-out prompt set: values of 1.51, 1.57, and
1.39 for the 3B, 7B, and 14B respectively indicate comparable
perturbation of the residual stream across model sizes, consistent
with the syntactic- and structural-preservation evidence above.
On (iii), manual inspection of a sample of generated files
confirms structural preservation of non-targeted code regions:
in the cases inspected, the abliterated 14B preserved all Flask
routes of multi-endpoint PromSec samples, left password-hashing
routines untouched, and modified only the SQL-construction
step. We use “structural preservation” rather than “functionality
preservation” deliberately—without unit tests for the seed

Safe seed S — parameterized query
def getFileCacheID(self, pth):
command = (
"SELECT file_id "
"FROM {0} "
"WHERE path=?;"
).format(TABLE_NAME)
params = (pth,)
data = self._run_command(
command, params)
...
Generated code S ′ — CWE-89 injected
def getFileCacheID(self, pth):
command = (
"SELECT file_id "
"FROM {0} "
"WHERE path=’{1}’;"
).format(TABLE_NAME, pth)
# params removed
data = self._run_command(
command)
...

Figure 3. CWE-89 injection example (14B abliterated, SafeCoder
dataset). The model replaces the parameterised placeholder ?
with direct string interpolation of pth, removing the params
tuple and passing the unsanitised input directly to the query
(CodeBLEU = 0.97, CrystalBLEU = 0.97). All other code regions
are preserved verbatim, consistent with the targeted-edit hypothesis. The high similarity is computed against the ground-truth
CWE-89-vulnerable variant released in SafeCoder, indicating
near-exact convergence on the attested vulnerable pattern.

samples, we cannot assert behavioural equivalence in the general
case, only structural correspondence in the inspected subset.
A complementary quantitative signal is provided by the
similarity between the LLM-generated code and the CWE89-vulnerable counterpart of the safe seed released in the
source corpus (Section 4). To make the signal interpretable,
we restrict the measurement to vulnerable non-refused responses
(Table II): similarity to a vulnerable reference is only meaningful
when a vulnerability transformation has actually taken place.
Because the safe and vulnerable corpus samples differ only in the
CWE-specific edit, high similarity to the vulnerable counterpart
indicates that the model converges on the attested vulnerable
pattern rather than producing an unrelated rewrite.

TABLE II
CrystalBLEU and CodeBLEU between LLM-generated code and the
CWE-89-vulnerable counterpart of the safe seed, as released in the
source corpus.

Model Cond.

CrystalBLEU

CodeBLEU

n

PromSec
3B
Base
3B
Abliterated
7B
Base
7B
Abliterated
14B
Abliterated

0.217±0.076
0.213±0.062
0.193±0.044
0.233±0.083
0.277±0.062

0.372±0.048
0.367±0.055
0.360±0.020
0.378±0.082
0.410±0.062

19
15
13
54
53

near-zero on CWE-89 injection prompts in code LLMs of 3B–
14B parameters and provides sufficient capability-preservation
evidence to make subsequent measurements interpretable. The
intervention removes the safety reflex without damaging the
underlying ability to write valid Python, and it converts the
model’s apparent failure rate on refused prompts into a clean
lower bound on its true capability.

5.3 RQ3: Capability Is the Limit Once Willingness Is Unlocked
The most informative comparison is across model sizes within
the abliterated condition, where refusal is held at zero or nearSafeCoder
zero. Capability scales with parameters. The post-abliteration
3B
Base
0.496±0.271 0.623±0.186 75
vulnerability injection rate is 25.0% on PromSec and 48.0%
3B
Abliterated 0.609±0.261 0.666±0.181 72
on SafeCoder for the 3B, 90.0% and 89.3% for the 7B, and
7B
Base
0.704±0.252 0.676±0.219 141
88.3% and 96.7% for the 14B. The 3B trails the larger models
7B
Abliterated 0.723±0.262 0.686±0.221 134
by ∼50–70 percentage points despite identical near-refusal-free
14B
Abliterated 0.742±0.258 0.721±0.209 145
conditions and the same prompt. The 7B and 14B are statistically
indistinguishable on PromSec (90.0% vs. 88.3%, a difference
within the run-to-run variance of the 14B cell), and the 14B
On SafeCoder, CrystalBLEU is in the 0.50–0.74 range and leads the 7B by ∼7 points on SafeCoder—a small but consistent
CodeBLEU in the 0.62–0.72 range across model sizes, indicating margin that is the only place in the data where the marginal
substantial overlap with the ground-truth vulnerable variant— capability of the 14B over the 7B is measurable on this task.
consistent with the targeted-edit interpretation read from the
The 3B Base and 3B Abliterated produce statistically indismanual inspection. On PromSec, both metrics are noticeably tinguishable injection rates on both datasets (31.7% vs. 25.0%
lower (CrystalBLEU 0.19–0.28, CodeBLEU 0.36–0.41): PromSec on PromSec, a difference well within the run-to-run variance
samples are multi-route Flask applications whereas the LLM of the abliterated cell, σ = 15.0 pp; 50.0% vs. 48.0% on
rewrites a single function, so structural overlap with the entire SafeCoder). The 3B Base already had ≤ 7% refusal on either
vulnerable reference is expected to be lower regardless of whether dataset, so abliteration is essentially a no-op—and the remaining
the targeted edit itself is performed correctly.
gap to the larger abliterated models cannot be closed by
The single apparent regression is the 3B base on SafeCoder, abliteration. It reflects the 3B’s limited ability to perform the
whose syntactic validity (85.3%) is in fact lower than its structural code edit (replace parameterized placeholders with
abliterated counterpart (94.7%). Inspection of the invalid cases concatenation while preserving routing, salt generation, and
reveals that the failures stem from generation truncation: the password hashing) implied by the prompt. Manual inspection
3B base produces verbose outputs that exhaust the token budget of failed 3B generations confirms two recurrent failure modes:
before closing the code block, yielding syntactically incomplete the model copies the safe code verbatim and adds a comment
extractions. The abliterated variant, generating more direct (acknowledging the request without executing it), or it modifies
outputs, exhibits fewer such cases.
an unrelated part of the function while leaving the parameterised
The cleanest evidence that the surgery is acting on the query intact (executing a transformation in the wrong location).
inhibitory reflex rather than on the generative substrate comes Both modes describe a model that understands the instruction
from the 7B Base on PromSec. 73% of generations on this cell but cannot carry out the targeted edit.
are refusals (no code), so valid_syntax = 25% purely because
Combining the two observations, willingness and capability
there is nothing to validate; the conditional success rate among are separable as orthogonal axes. At the 7B size, abliteration
the 27% of non-refused generations is approximately 81%. After on PromSec yields a ∼68-point increase in injection rate
abliteration, the unconditional rate matches that conditional rate (from 21.7% Base to 90.0% Abliterated); at the 14B size,
(100% syntactic validity, 90% vulnerability). In other words, it yields a ∼88-point increase on PromSec and a ∼97-point
abliteration does not improve the model on the prompts it was increase on SafeCoder (where the Base refused all 100% of
already willing to answer; it converts the prompts it was unwilling prompts). At the 3B size, abliteration yields a −7-point change on
to answer into the same outcome it would have produced had it PromSec (31.7% → 25.0%) and a −2-point change on SafeCoder
complied. This is the literal sense in which we say abliteration (50.0% → 48.0%)—in both cases within or close to the standard
removes the refusal reflex without altering the underlying ability: deviation of the measurement. Refusal removal therefore unlocks
the model that emerges from the edit is the model that was capability that is already there but does not create capability
already there underneath the refusal, now able to express what it that is missing. We report this negative delta transparently: it is
could already do. The implication is methodologically important. consistent with abliteration introducing a small non-conservative
Many evaluations of safety-aligned code LLMs report a single perturbation on models that were already largely compliant, and
observed refusal-or-error rate without distinguishing the two; our although it falls within run-to-run variance, it is worth flagging
results show that on the 7B PromSec configuration, more than for any future deployment on already low-refusal checkpoints.
70% of the apparent failure rate is actually refusal in disguise,
This is, to our knowledge, one of the first dataset-level
and is fully recoverable by a permanent low-rank weight edit. demonstrations of the dissociation in code LLMs, and it has
Takeaway for RQ2. Abliteration reduces refusal to zero or two readings. Methodologically, it suggests that the standard

TABLE III
Detector concordance for the abliterated cells, aggregated across both
datasets. Columns C, S, and B report the CodeQL, Semgrep, and Bandit
verdicts respectively (+ = flagged, − = not flagged); each row is one of
the eight possible verdict combinations, with counts summed across the
three runs (210 outputs per model).

C

Verdict
S
B

+
−
+
+
+
−
−
−

+
+
−
+
−
+
−
−

+
+
+
−
−
−
+
−

Model (Abliterated)
3B
7B
14B
6
41
0
2
0
9
29
123

24
105
0
0
0
17
42
22

41
97
0
0
1
5
54
12

psycopg2, and pymysql idioms common in SafeCoder; additionally, SafeCoder samples are short, single-function snippets
without explicit web-framework context, so the taint flow is
incomplete and CodeQL produces no finding even when string
concatenation is present. Semgrep and Bandit, which operate
on syntactic patterns rather than full taint flows, flag the same
generations as vulnerable regardless of context.
The Bandit-only cell is also non-trivial (29, 42, 54) and
reflects Bandit’s high recall on syntactic SQL-in-string patterns
regardless of whether the string is actually user-controlled. The
detectors form a recall-ordered chain—Bandit broadest, Semgrep
intermediate, CodeQL narrowest—rather than three independent
peers: when CodeQL flags a sample the other two almost always
confirm it, but the converse does not hold (a substantial share of
Bandit positives are not confirmed by Semgrep, and Semgreponly verdicts are themselves a minority). The manual-annotation
step is what allows the verdict to be resolved on the cases where
this chain disagrees with itself.

practice of measuring code-LLM “compliance” on a sensitive
task with a single rate—typically refusal-plus-failure—confounds
two phenomena that scale differently with parameters: willingness 6. Discussion
behaves as a binary unlock (present or not), while capability 6.1 Implications for Vulnerability Data Augmentation
behaves as a smooth function of size. A practitioner choosing a
The labelling regime described in Section 1 is the practical
model for vulnerability data generation should optimise for the motivation for our pipeline. Starting from a sample S confirmed
smaller phenomenon (capability) rather than the more visible safe by all three detectors, the 14B abliterated produces S ′
one (refusal), since the latter is removable and the former for which the validation protocol of Section 3-D confirms a
is not. Substantively, the 3B’s low post-abliteration rate is CWE-89 verdict in 96.7% of SafeCoder cases and 88.3% of
informative about the structure of its training: a model that PromSec cases. The remaining samples are not mislabelled; they
produces parameterised SQL queries on safe-code generation are dropped, since the validation protocol, including manual
tasks (the 3B Base does this 100% of the time on PromSec) adjudication of detector-positive outputs, determines that the
cannot reliably remove those parameters when explicitly asked LLM did not perform the requested transformation. This is
to. The asymmetry suggests that defensive code patterns are the qualitative shift over mined corpora: the labelling cost is
over-represented in the model’s training distribution to a degree not eliminated, but it is moved from an open-ended detection
that constrains its behaviour even outside the safety-alignment problem (with 20–71% noise [5]) to a confirmation problem on
layer that abliteration removes.
a sample whose intended class we specified.
Takeaway for RQ3. Once abliteration removes refusal, postThe 7B is the more practically interesting size: ∼ 90% injection
injection success rate is determined by model capacity rather than rate on both datasets at roughly half the parameter count of the
by the safety alignment that was just disabled. Abliteration is 14B and consistently lower wall-clock latency in our Q4_K_M
therefore a necessary but not sufficient condition for vulnerability setup, with abliterated weights that fit on consumer GPUs in
synthesis at small scale: refusal-free does not mean compliant, 4-bit quantisation. At the 3B scale, the unconditional injection
and the gap between the 3B and the larger models cannot be rate is 25% on PromSec and 48% on SafeCoder—low compared
closed by the same intervention that closed the gap on the 14B. with the larger sizes, but the resulting samples can still be filtered
through the validation protocol to a usable yield, which remains
5.4 Checker Concordance
competitive with mining-based pipelines [6], [7] while preserving
We further break down the detector verdicts by combination the alignment between intended and confirmed CWE.
across the three checkers (Table III, each row is a verdict
combination across CodeQL (C), Semgrep (S), and Bandit 6.2 Implications for Code-LLM Safety Alignment
(B); cells report sample counts summed across the three runs
The 14B Qwen2.5-Coder rejects every CWE-89 injection
(3×70 = 210 outputs per model). Detector-positive rows motivate prompt, even on safe code that the same model is fully capable
the manual adjudication step described in Section 3-D.).
of editing. The fact that this refusal is removable by a low-rank
The detectors agree on the full positive verdict (CodeQL ∧ weight edit, with no observable cost to general capability, has
Semgrep ∧ Bandit) on 6–41 samples per cell, and on the full two readings. Read positively, it suggests the safety alignment
negative verdict on 12–123 samples per cell.
of code LLMs is highly localised and well-understood at the
Across the abliterated cells shown in Table III, at least one mechanistic level—a useful target for both auditing and removal.
detector flags 473 of 630 outputs. Of these, 71 are unanimous Read defensively, it raises a concern: any deployment of an openpositives and 402 involve detector disagreement, illustrating why weights code LLM in a security-sensitive setting must assume
detector disjunction alone is not an adequate ground truth.
an adversary can perform abliteration on accessible cloud-GPU
This pattern reflects a tool-level rather than a model-level issue. infrastructure and run the resulting checkpoint on commodity
The CodeQL CWE-89 query is tuned for the flask_mysqldb hardware in 4-bit quantisation. The CWE-89 injection rate the
idioms used in PromSec, but does not recognise the sqlite3, 14B reaches after abliteration (≥ 88%) is precisely the rate at

which it would generate vulnerable code for an adversary in
possession of the published weights.
7. Threats to Validity
We consider the following threats to the validity
Single CWE. We restrict attention to CWE-89, the CWE
for which the validation toolchain (CodeQL, Semgrep, Bandit)
is most mature in Python. Generalisation to other CWEs,
particularly CWE-78 (OS Command Injection) and CWE-22
(Path Traversal), is left to future work.
Single language. The pipeline we describe is language-agnostic
in principle: it requires only an instruction-tuned code LLM
with non-trivial baseline refusal on the target CWE and a
vulnerability-detection toolchain mature enough in the target
language to validate generated code. We instantiate it on Python
as a case study, motivated in Section 1. The findings on refusal
prevalence (RQ1) and on capability preservation (RQ2) plausibly
generalise to other languages, since they concern the model’s
behaviour rather than the language; the willingness-vs-capability
dissociation in RQ3, however, may shift in absolute terms because
some languages are better represented in the training data of
code LLMs than others. We expect the qualitative pattern to be
robust but the quantitative thresholds to be language-dependent.
Empirical confirmation on JavaScript and Java is the most direct
extension of this work.
Single model family. All three sizes are drawn from the
Qwen2.5-Coder-Instruct family, which controls for tokenizer,
pretraining data, and architecture but does not establish that the
dissociation we report holds for, e.g., StarCoder2 or DeepSeekCoder. The base versions of the latter did not refuse our prompts
in pilot experiments, which is itself a result—abliteration is
unnecessary for them—but would not allow the willingness-vscapability comparison we make here.
Validation protocol. Our vuln verdict is the output of a
two-step protocol: detector ensemble first, followed by manual
adjudication of detector-positive outputs by two authors (Section 3-C). The detectors inherit their respective false-positive and
false-negative rates, but the manual step prevents the detector
disjunction from being treated as ground truth. A residual
concern is that a CWE-89 injection that no detector flags is
never inspected, and is therefore counted as non-vulnerable in
our framework. This is conservative in the direction of our main
claims: under-counting successful injections would only weaken
the observed size effects in RQ3.
Quantisation. All inference is performed on Q4_K_M GGUF
checkpoints, chosen to fit within the 32 GB RAM of the machine
used in our experiments. Aggressive 4-bit quantisation can
alter generation behaviour relative to higher-precision inference,
particularly on the smaller 3B model, where every bit of
representational capacity counts. We did not systematically
replicate at FP16; doing so on the 14B is the cleanest sanity
check available and is on the shortlist for follow-up.
Construct validity of refusal. We classify refusal lexically
rather than semantically. Manual inspection of 100 randomlysampled responses (50 base, 50 abliterated) showed three false
negatives (refusals not caught by the classifier) and zero false
positives, suggesting our refusal rates may be underestimates
in the base condition by 1–2 points, which strengthens the
willingness-vs-capability gap.

8. Ethical Considerations
We discuss the dual-use considerations of this work along the
four axes recommended for AI security research.
Research benefit. The pipeline described here addresses a
documented bottleneck in vulnerability detection research: the
scarcity of accurately-labelled Python vulnerability datasets [5],
[9]. Methods that can produce such datasets without inheriting
CVE-mining label noise are of direct interest to (i) detector
developers, who need clean training data; (ii) static-analyzer
maintainers, who benefit from calibrated test corpora; and
(iii) researchers studying the safety alignment of code LLMs,
who require empirical characterisations of refusal behaviour. The
willingness-vs-capability dissociation we report is intended to
inform all three communities.
Misuse risk. The pipeline can in principle be used to generate
vulnerable code for malicious purposes. We assess this risk
as moderate. The technique we apply (abliteration) is publicly
described and tooled [15], [24]; an actor capable of running it
on open-weights code LLMs does not require this paper, and the
underlying code transformations (replacing parameterized queries
with concatenation) are well documented in any introduction to
SQL injection. The empirical scenario we describe is therefore
a characterisation of an already-accessible attack surface, not a
novel offensive technique [14].
Release controls. Release controls. We adopt an asymmetric release policy. The evaluation harness (refusal classifier,
validators, scoring scripts) and aggregate measurements are
openly released to support reproducibility and downstream
detection research. Abliterated checkpoints, the abliteration
scripts targeted at the specific Qwen2.5-Coder weights used
here, and pre-generated vulnerable samples are not publicly
released: abliterated checkpoints are made available only under
controlled academic access through a request-based mechanism
that we will host alongside the paper artefacts upon acceptance,
requiring an institutional affiliation and a stated research purpose.
Scope limitations. The findings reported in this paper apply
specifically to Qwen2.5-Coder-Instruct on CWE-89 in Python
web applications. They do not establish that the same dualuse considerations transfer unchanged to other CWEs (some of
which carry higher harm ceilings than SQL injection), other
languages, or other model families. Future work that extends
the pipeline to additional CWEs—particularly memory-safety
classes in C/C++—should re-evaluate the misuse-risk balance
before any release decision.
9. Conclusion
We presented a preliminary feasibility study of LLM-based
vulnerability injection from safe code as an alternative to corpusmining-based dataset construction. Using Python as a case study,
we evaluated the Qwen2.5-Coder-Instruct family (3B, 7B, and
14B) on 1,260 generations across PromSec and SafeCoder,
combining abliteration with a multi-tool validation pipeline
based on CodeQL, Semgrep, Bandit, and manual adjudication.
Abliteration reduced refusal rates from up to 100% to near
zero while preserving syntactic validity above 93%. However,
vulnerability injection remained strongly capacity-dependent,
revealing a clear dissociation between willingness and capability
in code LLMs.

Future work will extend the study to additional CWEs,
programming languages, and model families, and will evaluate
whether detectors trained on the resulting corpus generalise to
real-world vulnerable code.
References
[1] NIST, “Juliet test suite for Java and C/C++ (nist software assurance reference dataset),” https://samate.nist.gov/SARD/,
2017, sARD: Software Assurance Reference Dataset.
[2] J. Fan, Y. Li, S. Wang, and T. N. Nguyen, “A C/C++
code vulnerability dataset with code changes and CVE
summaries,” in Proceedings of the 17th International
Conference on Mining Software Repositories (MSR), 2020,
pp. 508–512.
[3] Y. Zhou, S. Liu, J. Siow, X. Du, and Y. Liu, “Devign:
Effective vulnerability identification by learning comprehensive program semantics via graph neural networks,”
in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
(NeurIPS), 2019.
[4] S. Chakraborty, R. Krishna, Y. Ding, and B. Ray, “Deep
learning based vulnerability detection: Are we there yet?”
IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, vol. 48, no. 9,
pp. 3280–3296, 2022.
[5] R. Croft, M. A. Babar, and M. M. Kholoosi, “Data quality
for software vulnerability datasets,” in Proceedings of the
45th International Conference on Software Engineering,
ser. ICSE ’23. IEEE Press, 2023, p. 121–133. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSE48619.2023.00022
[6] Y. Nong, Y. Ou, M. Pradel, F. Chen, and H. Cai, “Vulgen:
Realistic vulnerability generation via pattern mining and
deep learning,” in 2023 IEEE/ACM 45th International
Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE), 2023, pp.
2527–2539.
[7] Y. Nong, R. Fang, G. Yi, K. Zhao, X. Luo, F. Chen,
and H. Cai, “Vgx: Large-scale sample generation for
boosting learning-based software vulnerability analyses,”
in Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM 46th International
Conference on Software Engineering, ser. ICSE ’24. New
York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery,
2024. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3597503.
3639116
[8] S. Daneshvar et al., “VulScribeR: Exploring RAG-based
vulnerability augmentation with LLMs,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2408.04125, 2024.
[9] Z. Sheng, Z. Chen, S. Gu, H. Huang, G. Gu, and
J. Huang, “Llms in software security: A survey of
vulnerability detection techniques and insights,” ACM
Comput. Surv., vol. 58, no. 5, Nov. 2025. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3769082
[10] M. Alfadel, D. E. Costa, and E. Shihab, “Empirical
analysis of security vulnerabilities in python packages,”
Empirical Softw. Engg., vol. 28, no. 3, Mar. 2023. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10664-022-10278-4
[11] A. Mechri, M. A. Ferrag, and M. Debbah, “Secureqwen:
Leveraging llms for vulnerability detection in python
codebases,” Computers & Security, vol. 148, p. 104151,
2025. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0167404824004565

[12] M. Nazzal, I. Khalil, A. Khreishah, and N. Phan, “PromSec:
Prompt optimization for secure generation of functional
source code with large language models,” in Proceedings
of the ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security (CCS), 2024.
[13] J. He and M. Vechev, “Large language models for code:
Security hardening and adversarial testing,” in Proceedings of the ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and
Communications Security (CCS), 2023, pp. 1865–1879.
[14] R. Natella, P. Liguori, C. Improta, B. Cukic, and D. Cotroneo, “Ai code generators for security: Friend or foe?” IEEE
Security & Privacy, vol. 22, no. 5, pp. 73–81, 2024.
[15] A. Arditi, O. Obeso, A. Syed, D. Paleka, N. Panickssery,
W. Gurnee, and N. Nanda, “Refusal in language models
is mediated by a single direction,” Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, vol. 37, pp. 136 037–
136 083, 2024.
[16] P. Liguori, E. Al-Hossami, V. Orbinato, R. Natella,
S. Shaikh, D. Cotroneo, and B. Cukic, “Evil: exploiting
software via natural language,” in 2021 IEEE 32nd
International symposium on software reliability engineering
(ISSRE). IEEE, 2021, pp. 321–332.
[17] P. Liguori, E. Al-Hossami, D. Cotroneo, R. Natella,
B. Cukic, and S. Shaikh, “Shellcode_ia32: A dataset for
automatic shellcode generation,” in Proceedings of the 1st
workshop on natural language processing for programming
(NLP4Prog 2021), 2021, pp. 58–64.
[18] P. Liguori, E. Al-Hossami, D. Cotroneo, R. Natella,
B. Cukic, and S. Shaikh, “Can we generate shellcodes
via natural language? an empirical study,” Autom. Softw.
Eng., vol. 29, no. 1, p. 30, 2022. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10515-022-00331-3
[19] P. Liguori, C. Improta, R. Natella, B. Cukic, and D. Cotroneo, “Enhancing ai-based generation of software exploits
with contextual information,” in 2024 IEEE 35th International Symposium on Software Reliability Engineering
(ISSRE). IEEE, 2024, pp. 180–191.
[20] C. Improta, P. Liguori, R. Natella, B. Cukic, and D. Cotroneo, “Reading between the lines: Context-aware ai-based
generation of software exploits,” Empirical Software Engineering, vol. 31, no. 3, p. 60, 2026.
[21] P. Liguori, C. Marescalco, R. Natella, V. Orbinato, and
L. Pianese, “The power of words: Generating {PowerShell}
attacks from natural language,” in 18th USENIX WOOT
Conference on Offensive Technologies (WOOT 24), 2024,
pp. 27–43.
[22] C. G. Frédéric Bogaerts, N. Ivaki, and J. Fonseca, “Using
ai to inject vulnerabilities in python code,” in 2023 53rd
Annual IEEE/IFIP International Conference on Dependable
Systems and Networks Workshops (DSN-W), 2023, pp. 223–
230.
[23] B. Hui, J. Yang, Z. Cui et al., “Qwen2.5-coder technical
report,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.12186, 2024.
[24] OBLITERATUS Contributors, “Obliteratus: An open
platform for analysis-informed refusal removal in large
language models,” 2026, 15 analysis modules, 837
tests. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/elder-plinius/
OBLITERATUS

