# fetched: 2026-06-13T23:44:14.843Z
# arxiv: 2502.17420
# url: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2502.17420

The Geometry of Refusal in Large Language Models:
Concept Cones and Representational Independence

Tom Wollschläger * 1 Jannes Elstner * 1 Simon Geisler 1 2 Vincent Cohen-Addad 3
Stephan Günnemann 1 Johannes Gasteiger 3 4

arXiv:2502.17420v2 [cs.LG] 8 Feb 2026

Abstract

these advancements also
introduce serious risks.
As artificial intelligence
becomes more powerful,
it can be misused for
harmful purposes, such
as attacking critical infrastructure or spreading misinformation. Ensuring that these models remain aligned with
Figure 1. An example of a 3D
human values has beconcept cone with its basis veccome a crucial research
tors. All directions in the cone
challenge (Liu et al.,
mediate refusal.
2023; Schwinn et al.,
2025). Despite significant progress, LLMs, like all machine learning models, remain vulnerable to adversarial attacks that can bypass alignment mechanisms and induce harmful outputs (Szegedy
et al., 2014; Carlini et al., 2024).

The safety alignment of large language models (LLMs) can be circumvented through adversarially crafted inputs, yet the mechanisms by
which these attacks bypass safety barriers remain poorly understood. Prior work suggests
that a single refusal direction in the model’s activation space determines whether an LLM refuses a request. In this study, we propose a novel
gradient-based approach to representation engineering and use it to identify refusal directions.
Contrary to prior work, we uncover multiple independent directions and even multi-dimensional
concept cones that mediate refusal. Moreover,
we show that orthogonality alone does not imply independence under intervention, motivating
the notion of representational independence that
accounts for both linear and non-linear effects.
Using this framework, we identify mechanistically independent refusal directions. We show
that refusal mechanisms in LLMs are governed
by complex spatial structures and identify functionally independent directions, confirming that
multiple distinct mechanisms drive refusal behavior. Our gradient-based approach uncovers these
mechanisms and can further serve as a foundation
for future work on understanding LLMs.

Recent work in interpretability has provided valuable insights into how LLMs encode and process information
(Nanda et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2022; Cunningham et al.,
2023; Heinzerling & Inui, 2024). Prior studies (Belrose et al., 2023; Gurnee & Tegmark, 2023; Marks &
Tegmark, 2024) suggest that concepts—ranging from simple to complex—are often encoded linearly in the model’s
residual stream. Methods such as representation engineering
(Zou et al., 2023a) allow researchers to use input prompts to
analyze model behavior by extracting and manipulating such
concepts. However, the mechanisms enabling adversarial
jailbreaks that bypass alignment safeguards remain poorly
understood. Some evidence suggests that refusals to harmful queries are mediated by a single “refusal direction” in
activation space (Arditi et al., 2024), and that jailbreaks rely
on manipulating this direction (Yu et al., 2024), yet these
assumptions require further examination. Understanding refusal mechanisms is crucial, as it has direct implications for
both offensive capabilities—informing more sophisticated
jailbreaks (Huang et al., 2024)—and more importantly developing robust defensive strategies like improved adversarial training (Yu et al., 2024) and inference–time monitoring.

1. Introduction
The breakthrough of scaling large language models (LLMs)
has led to an unprecedented leap in capabilities, driving
widespread real-world adoption (OpenAI, 2022). However,
*

Equal contribution 1 School of Computation, Information
& Technology and Munich Data Science Institute, Technical
University of Munich 2 Now at Google Research 3 Google Research 4 Now at Anthropic. Correspondence to: Tom Wollschläger
<tom.wollschlaeger@tum.de>.
Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025
by the author(s).

1

The Geometry of Refusal in Large Language Models

In this work, we go beyond extracting concepts using common input prompt methods by introducing a novel gradientbased approach to representation engineering which we use
to investigate the mechanisms underlying refusal behavior
in LLMs. We extract refusal-mediating directions more
effectively, improving both precision and control while minimizing unintended side effects, which we demonstrate in
Section 4. Unlike prior work that assumes model refusal is
controlled by a single linear direction, we show in Section 5
that there exist multi-dimensional polyhedral cones which
contain infinite refusal directions; we show an illustrative
example in Figure 1. To further characterize refusal mechanisms in language models, we introduce representational
independence, a criterion for identifying directions that remain mutually unaffected under intervention, capturing both
linear and non-linear dependencies across layers. In Section 6, we demonstrate that even under this strict notion of
independence, multiple complementary refusal directions
exist.1

feature from the model’s residual stream as shown by prior
work (Panickssery et al., 2024; Bolukbasi et al., 2016; Burns
et al., 2024). Recent studies obtain this direction by computing the difference-in-means (DIM) (Panickssery et al.,
2024; Arditi et al., 2024; Stolfo et al., 2024) between model
representations on datasets of harmful prompts Dharm and
harmless prompts Dgood :

(l)
vi =

(l)

(l)

(1)

(l)

(2)

which subtracts a scaled r from the residual stream.We
follow common practice to apply both operations across all
token positions and ablation across all layers while doing
subtraction only at a single layer (Arditi et al., 2024).

3. Related Work
Adversarial attacks for LLMs. Many studies have explored hand–crafted adversarial techniques, such as persona
modulation (Shah et al., 2023), language modifications (Zhu
et al., 2023), or prompt engineering using repetitions and
persuasive phrasing (Rao et al., 2024). Other works take a
more systematic approach, employing techniques like genetic algorithms and random search (Chen et al., 2024),
discrete optimization over input tokens (Zou et al., 2023b),
or gradient-based methods to identify high-impact perturbations (Geisler et al., 2024). While identifying these vulnerabilities enables adversarial fine-tuning (Xhonneux et al.,
2024) or improved training through Reinforcement Learning
with Human Feedback (RLHF), recent works suggest that
robustness remains a challenge (Zou et al., 2023a; Schwinn
et al., 2024; Geisler et al., 2024; Scholten et al., 2025).

(l)

= x̃i + MLP(x̃i )

(L+1)

The final residual stream xi
is unembedded to yield log(L+1)
its: ℓi = U NEMBED(xi
). The softmax function converts these logits into a probability distribution over tokens:
P (t | t1 , . . . , ti ) = softmax(ℓi )t . We omit technical details
that are not critical for this work such as LayerNorm.
Extracting refusal directions. Paired prompts of harmful
and harmless requests allow the extraction of a directional
1

(l)

x̌i = xi − α · r̂,

(0)

(l)

(l)

which projects the residual stream to a subspace orthogonal
to r, or alternatively through activation subtraction:

sisting of tokens ti , each token is first embedded: xi =
E MBED(ti ). The model then processes the token sequence
through L layers, where at each layer l = 1, . . . , L and
token position i the following transformation is applied:
(l+1)

p∈Dsafe

x̃i = xi − r̂ r̂ ⊤ xi ,

Notation. Let f : TNseq → ∆Nseq ×|T| denote a language
model, where ∆|T| is the probability simplex over vocabulary T. Given a prompt p = (t1 , . . . , tNseq ) ∈ TNseq con-

(l)

p′ ∈Dharm



1  X (l) 
xi (p)
|Dsafe |

Adversarial steering attacks. The extracted harmfulness
direction can be used to manipulate the model’s refusal
behavior. With white-box access, an attacker can prompt
the model with harmful queries and suppress activations
in the harmfulness direction, thereby reducing the model’s
probability of refusal. This can be done through directional
ablation of r (where r̂ denotes the unit vector) (Zou et al.,
2023a):

2. Background

(l)



(l)
xi (p′ )−

(l)

• We show that our gradient-based representation engineering can advance general LLM understanding and
specifically demonstrate its efficacy for understanding
refusal mechanisms.
• We introduce representational independence, a practical framework for characterizing how different interventions interact within an LLM’s activation space, and
use it to find independent refusal directions.
• We show that rather than a single refusal direction,
there exist multi-dimensional cones in which all directions mediate refusal.

(l)

|Dharm |


X

Here, xi (p) represents the residual stream activations at
position i, layer l for input prompt p.

To summarize, our core contributions are:

x̃i = xi + ATTN(l) (x1:i ), xi

1

Interpretability of LLMs. A parallel line of research focuses on understanding the internal mechanisms of LLMs,

Resources & code: cs.cit.tum.de/daml/geometry-of-refusal

2

The Geometry of Refusal in Large Language Models

4. Gradient–based Refusal Directions

as their natural language outputs provide a unique opportunity to link internal states to interpretable behaviors. Interpretability research has led to the identification of various “features”—concepts represented by distinct activation patterns (Cunningham et al., 2023)—as well as “circuits”, which are subnetworks that implement a specific
function or behavior. Prominent examples are backup circuits (Nanda et al., 2024) and information mover circuits
(Wang et al., 2022). Many interpretability insights rely on
extracting features using paired inputs with opposing semantics (Burns et al., 2024) and then manipulating residual
stream activations to elicit specific behaviors (Panickssery
et al., 2024). Representation engineering, as proposed by
Zou et al. (2023a), investigates the linear representation of
concepts such as truthfulness, honesty, and fairness in LLMs.
The effectiveness of these methods supports the hypothesis
that many features are encoded linearly in LLMs (Marks
& Tegmark, 2024). These insights allow researchers to pinpoint and manipulate concept representations or specific
circuits, enabling targeted debugging of behaviors, mitigating biases, and advancing safer, more reliable AI systems.

Research Question: Can our gradient–based representation engineering identify refusal directions?
To investigate the refusal mechanisms in language models,
we propose a gradient-based algorithm that identifies directions controlling refusal in the model’s activation space. We
refer to it as Refusal Direction Optimization (RDO). Unlike prior approaches that extract refusal directions using
paired prompts of harmless and harmful instructions (Arditi
et al., 2024), our method leverages gradients to find better
directions instead of solely relying on model activations.
Similar to (Park et al., 2023), we define two key properties
for refusal directions:
Definition 4.1. Refusal Properties:
• Monotonic Scaling: when using the direction for ac(l)
(l)
tivation addition/subtraction x̌i = xi + α · r, the
model’s probability of refusing instructions should
scale monotonically with α.

Understanding Refusal Mechanisms. Recent research
has focused on understanding the mechanisms underlying
refusal behaviors in LLMs. For example, removing safetycritical neurons has been shown to decrease robustness (Wei
et al., 2024; Li et al., 2024b). Zheng et al. (2024) demonstrate that adding explicit safety prompts shifts the internal
representation along a harmfulness direction. O’Brien et al.
(2024) propose to use sparse autoencoders to identify latent
features that mediate refusal. The most relevant work to ours
is Arditi et al. (2024), which builds on Zou et al. (2023a)
and examines the representation of refusal in LLMs. Their
work suggests that a single direction in a model’s activation
space determines whether the model accepts or refuses a
request. We challenge this notion by showing that refusal is
mediated through more nuanced mechanisms. Concurrently,
Pan et al. (2025) identify multiple independent refusal directions, providing more evidence to our findings in Section 6.
While their focus is on representation shifts during safety
finetuning, our work introduces a novel, gradient-based,
top-down discovery approach applicable to any model.

• Surgical Ablation: ablating the refusal direction
(l)
(l)
(l)
through projection x̃i = xi − r̂ r̂ ⊤ xi should
cause the model to answer previously refused harmful
prompts, while preserving normal behavior on harmless inputs.
We can encode the desired refusal properties into loss functions, allowing us to find corresponding refusal vectors r
using gradient descent. For the monotonic scaling property,
we train the model to refuse harmless instructions psafe when
running the model f with a modified forward pass fadd(r,l)
in which we add r to the activations at layer l. We minimize the cross-entropy between the model output and target
refusal response trefusal . For the surgical ablation property,
we similarly compute the cross–entropy between a harmful
response target tanswer and the output of a modified forward
pass fablate(r) to make the model respond to harmful instructions. A key strength of our gradient–based approach is the
ability to control any predefined objective and thus we can
control the extent to which other concepts are affected during interventions. For this, we use a retain loss based on the
Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence to ensure that directional
ablation of r on harmless instructions does not change the
model’s output over a target response tretain . Algorithm 1
shows the full training procedure for our refusal directions.

Over-refusal Recent work addresses LLM over-refusal,
where benign queries are rejected by overly strict safety
filters. Röttger et al. (2023) (XSTest) and An et al. (2024)
(PHTest) provide benchmarks to quantify false refusal rates,
expanded by Cui et al. (2025)’s OR-Bench. Shi et al. (2024)
attribute this to lexical shortcuts, proposing self-contrastive
decoding for mitigation. Similarly, Li & Liu (2025) highlight over-defense in prompt injection guards with NotInject
and InjecGuard. Collectively, these studies underscore the
challenge of balancing safety and helpfulness, offering resources to diagnose and mitigate overrefusal.

Setup. We construct a dataset of harmless and harmful
prompts from the ALPACA (Taori et al., 2023) and SALAD BENCH (Li et al., 2024a) datasets (see Section A.1). An
important consideration for our algorithm is the choice of
targets tanswer and trefusal . Generally, language models differ
in their refusal and response styles, which is why we use
3

The Geometry of Refusal in Large Language Models

Figure 2. Attack success rates of refusal directions for different models. We compare the DIM direction baseline that is extracted from
prompts against our Refusal Direction Optimization for jailbreaking with directional ablation and activation subtraction.

Algorithm 1 Refusal Direction Optimization (RDO)
Input: Frozen model f , scaling coefficient α, addition layer
index ladd , learning rate η, loss weights λabl , λadd , λret , and
data D = {(pharm,i , psafe,i , tanswer,i , trefusal,i , tretain ,i )}N
i=1 .
Output: Refusal direction r

2024), Qwen2.5 (Yang et al., 2024), and Llama-3 (Dubey
et al., 2024) families and compare against the DIM direction
for which we use the same setup as Arditi et al. (2024) but
with our expanded dataset. For a fair comparison, we train
the refusal direction at the same layer that the DIM direction
is extracted from, and during activation addition/subtraction
set the scaling coefficient α to the norm of the DIM direction. We evaluate the jailbreak Attack Success Rate (ASR)
on JAILBREAK B ENCH (Chao et al., 2024) using the S TRON G REJECT fine–tuned judge (Souly et al., 2024). For inducing refusal via activation addition, we test 128 harmless
instructions sampled from ALPACA using substring matching of common refusal phrases. Model completions for
evaluation are generated using greedy decoding with a maximum generation length of 512 tokens.

1: Initialize r randomly
2: while not converged do
3:
Sample batch B ∼ D
4:
L ← C OMPUTE L OSS (r, f, B)
5:
r ← r − η∇r L
6:
r ← r/||r||2
7: end while
1: function C OMPUTE L OSS(r, f, B)
2:
pharm , psafe , tanswer , trefusal , tretain = B
3:
Lablation = C E L OSS(fablate(r) (pharm ), tanswer )
4:
Laddition = C E L OSS(fadd(αr̂,ladd ) (psafe ), trefusal )
5:
Lretain = KL(fablate(r) (psafe ), f (psafe ), tretain )
6:
L = λabl Lablation + λadd Laddition + λret Lretain
7:
return L

Does the direction mediate refusal? In Figure 2, we show
that for jailbreaking, our approach is competitive when using directional ablation and, on average, outperforms DIM
when subtracting the refusal direction. Notably, despite not
being explicitly optimized for subtraction–based attacks,
our direction naturally generalizes to this setting. Figure 10
shows that adding the refusal direction to harmless inputs
induces refusal more effectively with RDO than with DIM,
further indicating that our method manipulates refusal more
effectively.

model–specific targets rather than generating them via uncensored LLMs as in Zou et al. (2024). Specifically, we use
the DIM refusal direction to generate our targets, though
any effective attack can work. For the harmful answers
tanswer , we ablate the DIM direction and generate 30 tokens.
Similarly, we use activation addition on harmless instructions to produce refusal targets trefusal . For helpful answers
on harmless instructions that should be retained tretain , we
generate 29 tokens without intervention. The retain loss
Lretain is applied over the last 30 tokens, such that the last
token of the model’s chat template is included. We detail
hyperparameters and implementation in Section A.

Is the direction more precise? To measure the side effects
when intervening with the directions we track benchmark
performance. Arditi et al. (2024) show that directional ablation with the DIM direction tends to have little impact on
benchmark performance, except for TruthfulQA (Lin et al.,
2021). In Table 1, we show that RDO impacts TruthfulQA
performance much less severely, reducing the error by 40%
on average. We show the results for more benchmarks in
Section B.3.

Evaluation. We evaluate our method by training a refusal
direction on various models from the Gemma 2 (Team et al.,

We then evaluate the trade–off between safety and over–

4

The Geometry of Refusal in Large Language Models

constraint λi ≥ 0 ensures that all directions within the
cone consistently strengthen refusal behavior. Without this
constraint, allowing negative coefficients could introduce
opposing effects, reducing the overall effectiveness. Enforcing orthogonality of the basis vectors prevents finding
co-linear directions. Note that in practice, directions in activation space cannot be scaled arbitrarily high without model
degeneration, which effectively bounds λi .

Table 1. TruthfulQA benchmark performance for directional ablation with the DIM or RDO directions, compared to the baseline
(no intervention). Higher values indicate better performance.

Chat model

DIM

RDO (ours)

Baseline

G EMMA 2 2B
G EMMA 2 9B
L LAMA 3 8B
Q WEN 2.5 1.5B
Q WEN 2.5 3B
Q WEN 2.5 7B
Q WEN 2.5 14B

47.8
52.8
48.7
42.9
54.2
58.7
63.3

51.4 (+3.6)
56.7 (+3.9)
51.0 (+2.3)
44.0 (+1.1)
54.5 (+0.3)
60.0 (+1.3)
67.9 (+4.6)

55.8
61.1
52.8
46.5
57.2
63.1
70.8

Algorithm 2 Refusal Cone Optimization (RCO)
1: Initialize B = [b1 , . . . , bn ] randomly
2: while not converged do
3:
Sample batch B ∼ D
4:
Lsample ← Er∼Sample(B) [C OMPUTE L OSS(r, f, B)]
Pn
5:
Lbasis ← n1 i=1 C OMPUTE L OSS(bi , f, B)
6:
L = Lsample + Lbasis
7:
B ← B − η∇B L
8:
B ← G RAM S CHMIDT(B)
9: end while

refusal for RDO and DIM on the XSTest benchmark
(Röttger et al., 2023). As detailed in Section G, RDO consistently achieves a higher refusal rate for harmful inputs while
maintaining or reducing the benign over–refusal rate compared to DIM. This means that for any given level of benign
over–refusal, our method refuses more harmful requests,
thereby yielding a uniformly better trade–off.

1: function S AMPLE(B)
2:
s ∼ Unif(x ∈ Rn+ : ||x||2 = 1)
3:
r = Bs
4:
return r

Is our method versatile? Hyperparameter tuning of the
retain loss weight λret in Algorithm 1 allows for balancing
between attack success and side effects (Section C.2). We
observe that for many models—especially those in the Qwen
2.5 family—the majority of estimated DIM directions have
too high side–effects, rendering it an unsuccessful attack
(Figure 16). Our method is more flexible than previous work
as we can choose the target layer freely while limiting side
effects through the retain loss.

In Algorithm 2, we describe the procedure to find the cone’s
basis vectors. The basis vectors are initialized randomly
and iteratively optimized using projected gradient descent.
We compute the previous losses defined in Algorithm 1 on
Monte Carlo samples from the cone, as well as on the basis vectors themselves. Computing the loss on the basis
vectors improves both stability and the lower bounds of
the ASR. This is because the basis vectors are the boundaries of the cone and thus tend to degrade first. After each
step, we project the basis back onto the cone using the
Gram–Schmidt orthogonalization procedure. Because the
directional ablation operation uses the normalized r̂ rather
than r, sampling convex combinations of the basis vectors
and normalizing them would introduce a bias towards the
basis vectors themselves. Instead, we sample unit vectors in
the cone uniformly to ensure better coverage of the space.

Key Takeaways. Our RDO yields more effective refusal directions with fewer side effects, establishing
that gradient–based representation engineering is an
effective approach for extracting meaningful directions, while allowing for more modeling freedom
such as incorporating side constraints.

5. Multi-dimensional Refusal Cones
Research Question: Is refusal in LLMs governed by
a single direction, or does it emerge from a more
complex underlying geometry?

Can we find refusal concept cones? We train cones of increasing dimensionality using the same experimental setup
as described in Section 4. We measure the cone’s effectiveness in mediating refusal by sampling 256 vectors from each
cone and computing the ASRs of the samples for directional
ablation. We show the results in Figure 3 and confirm that
the directions in the cones have the desired refusal properties in Figure 20. Notably, we identify refusal–mediating
cones with dimensions up to five across all tested models.
This suggests that the activation space in language models
exhibits a general property where refusal behavior is encoded within multi–dimensional cones rather than a single

We extend RDO to higher dimensions by searching for
regions in activation space where all vectors control refusal behavior. For this, we optimize an orthonormal basis
B = [b1 , . . . , bN ] spanning an N -dimensional polyhedral
PN
cone RN = { i=1 λi bi | λi ≥ 0}\{0}, where all directions r ∈ RN satisfy the refusal properties (Theorem 4.1).
Since all directions in the cone correspond to the same refusal concept, we also refer to this as a concept cone. The
5

The Geometry of Refusal in Large Language Models

Figure 3. Attack success rate for multi-dimensional cones for Gemma 2, Qwen 2.5 and Llama 3. The cone performance is measured via
the performance of Monte Carlo samples which are depicted as boxplot.

linear direction.

tack. However, the higher ASR in the low–sample regime
suggests that different directions capture distinct, complementary aspects of the refusal mechanism. Additionally,
Figure 19 reveals that ASR increases with cone dimensionality but plateaus at four dimensions. This trend indicates that
higher–dimensional cones offer an advantage over single–
direction manipulation, likely by influencing complementary mechanisms. The plateau likely occurs because the
model does not support higher–dimensional refusal cones.

Do larger models contain higher–dimensional cones?
In Figure 4, we evaluate the effect of model size within the
Qwen 2.5 family. We observe that across all model sizes, the
lower bounds of cone performance degrade significantly as
dimensionality increases. In other words, a higher number
of sampled directions have low ASR. Larger models appear
to support higher–dimensional refusal cones. A plausible
explanation is that models with larger residual stream dimensions (e.g., 5120 for the 14B model vs. 1536 for the
1.5B model) allow for more distinct and orthogonal directions that mediate refusal. Finally, in Figure 18, we confirm
that directions sampled from these cones effectively induce
refusal behavior, further supporting the notion that multiple
axes contribute to the model’s refusal decision.

Key Takeaways. We show that refusal mechanisms in LLMs span high–dimensional polyhedral
cones, capturing diverse aspects of refusal behavior. This highlights their geometric complexity
and demonstrates the effectiveness of our gradient–
based method in identifying intricate structures.

Do different directions uniquely influence refusal?
To further investigate the role of different vectors, we assess whether multiple sampled cone directions influence
the model in complementary ways. Specifically, we sample
varying numbers of directions from Gemma–2–2B’s four–
dimensional refusal cone and, for each prompt, select the
most effective one under directional ablation (more details
in Section A). To ensure a fair comparison, we use temperature sampling with the single–dimension RDO direction
to generate the same number of attacks and similarly select
the most effective instance. We study Gemma 2 2B and
sample from its four–dimensional cone, since performance
degrades significantly for larger dimensions (see Figure 17).

6. Mechanistic Understanding of Directions
Research Question: Are there genuinely independent directions that influence a model’s refusal behavior? Can we access the discovered refusal directions through perturbations in the token space?
In the previous section, we demonstrated that refusal behavior spans a multi–dimensional cone with infinitely
many directions. However, whether the orthogonal refusal–
mediating basis vectors manipulate independent mechanisms remains an open question. In this section, we conduct
a mechanistic analysis to investigate how these directions
interact within the model’s activation space and whether
they can be directly influenced through input manipulation.

Figure 5 shows that sampling multiple directions leads to
higher ASR compared to sampling with various temperatures in the low–sample regime. For a higher number of
samples, the randomness dominates the success of the at6

The Geometry of Refusal in Large Language Models

Figure 4. Refusal evaluation for different cone dimensions for the Qwen2.5 model family. The cone performance for models with fewer
parameters degrades faster with increasing cone dimension compared to larger models.

though their assumptions differ from ours, especially since
they assume a one–to–one mapping from output feature to
direction in activation space, their experiments suggest that
independent directions are almost orthogonal. This motivates a deeper empirical examination of how orthogonal
refusal directions in language models interact in practice.
Are orthogonal directions independent? To explore this,
we first use RDO to identify a direction r that is orthogonal to the DIM direction v, i.e., r ⊤ v = 0. We then
measure how much one direction is influenced when ablating the other direction
by monitoring the cosine similarity
λ⊤ µ
cos(λ, µ) = ||λ||·||µ||
between the prompt’s representation
in the residual stream x and the directions v and r. Specifi(l)
(l)
cally, we track: cos(r, xi (pharm )) and cos(v, xi (pharm ))
at the last token position and for all layers l ∈ {0, . . . , L}
on 128 harmful instructions in our validation set. Intuitively,
ablating a causally independent direction in earlier layers
should not intervene with the reference direction in later
layers. Otherwise, there is some indirect influence through
the non–linear transformations of the neural network.

Figure 5. ASR for best–of–N sampling using N samples from the
4–dimensional refusal cone of Gemma–2–2B, compared to best–
of–N sampling with temperature T using the single–dimension
RDO.

This allows us to determine whether they are merely latent
properties of the network or actively utilized by the model
in response to specific prompts.
6.1. Representational Independence

The top row of Figure 6 shows how the cosine similarity between the RDO and DIM directions changes under intervention. The left plot shows the cosine similarity between the
RDO direction and the activations on a normal forward pass
(solid line) and while ablating the DIM direction (dashed
line). The right plot presents the reverse setting. Despite
enforced orthogonality, ablating RDO indirectly reduces the
representation of the DIM direction in the model activations
in the later layers, as measured by cosine similarity. This
effect is reciprocal, suggesting that orthogonality alone does
not guarantee independence throughout the network. In
Figure 21 we show the results for additional models.

We defined the basis vectors of the cones to be orthogonal,
which is often considered an indicator of causal independence. The intuition is that if two vectors are orthogonal,
they each influence a third vector without interfering with
the other. Mathematically, for the directions r, v and repre(l)
sentation xi we have:
(l)

(l)

(l)

if r T v = 0 then r T (xi − vv T xi ) = r T xi .
However, despite this mathematical property, recent work by
Park et al. (2024) suggests that in language models, conclusions about causal independence cannot be drawn using orthogonality measured with the Euclidean scalar product. Al7

The Geometry of Refusal in Large Language Models

Figure 7. Attack success rate for jailbreaking the model with directional ablation of representationally independent refusal directions
for different models on JAILBREAK B ENCH. Each direction is
representationally independent to all previous directions and the
DIM direction.

Figure 6. Influence of representational independence. Figure (a)
shows the cosine similarity between RDO⊥ , a refusal direction
orthogonal to DIM, and the model activations in a normal forward
pass (solid line) compared to a forward pass where DIM is ablated
(striped line). Figure (b) shows the reverse scenario. In Figure (c)
and (d) we contrast how the DIM direction and a representationally
independent direction (RepInd) influence each other.

instructions:
LRepInd =

Motivated by this observation, we introduce a stricter notion
of independence: Representational Independence (RepInd):

Do independent directions exist? With this extension, we
can find a direction that is RepInd from the DIM direction,
yet still fulfills the refusal properties from Theorem 4.1.
We illustrate the representational independence for Gemma
2 2B in the second row of Figure 6, where we see that
the RepInd and DIM direction barely affect each other’s
representation under directional ablation.

Definition 6.1. The directions λ, µ ∈ Rd are representationally independent (under directional ablation) with respect to
the activations x of a model in a set of layers l ∈ L if:
(l)

ˆ
∀l ∈ L : cos(x(l) , λ) = cos(x̃
abl(µ) , λ)

(l)

ˆ (l) , µ),
and cos(x(l) , µ) = cos(x̃
abl(λ)


ˆ (l−1) ) + x̃
ˆ (l−1)
= f (l) (x̃
denotes

ˆ
where x̃
abl(λ)

abl(λ)

abl(λ)


1 Xh
ˆ (l) , r) 2
cos(x(l) , r) − cos(x̃
abl(v)
|L|
l∈L
 i
ˆ (l) , v) 2 .
+ cos(x(l) , v) − cos(x̃
abl(r)

We iteratively search for additional directions that are not
only RepInd to DIM but also of all previously identified
RepInd directions. Despite these strong constraints, we successfully identify multiple such directions that maintain an
ASR significantly above random vector intervention (Figure 7). The ASR declines as you search for more directions,
which could be attributed to the increased difficulty of the
optimization problem due to additional constraints, or that
the models contain a limited number of directions that independently contribute to refusal. Nevertheless, these results
show that refusal in LLMs is mediated by multiple independent mechanisms, underpinning the idea that refusal
behavior is more nuanced than previously assumed.

abl(λ)

the activations at layer l produced from the previous layer’s
already ablated activations with the ablation applied again
after the residual addition.
Instead of relying solely on geometric orthogonality, we
say that two directions are representationally independent
when ablating one of them does not change how strongly
the other is expressed in the model’s activations. Because
we track cosine similarity at every layer, any non–linear
distortions introduced earlier in the network are captured
downstream. Consequently, representational independence
guarantees that—measured by cosine similarity—no linear, non–linear, or cumulative interaction in the network
increases or decreases how much the other examined direction is represented.

Do the directions manipulate different mechanisms?
Representational independence should have causal significance in language models, such that ablating different representationally independent directions corresponds to manipulating independent mechanisms. For this, we demonstrate
that simultaneously ablating multiple representationally independent directions yields better performance. Figure 8

To enforce this property, we extend Algorithm 1 with an
additional loss term that penalizes changes in cosine similarity at the last token position when ablating on harmful
8

The Geometry of Refusal in Large Language Models

Key Takeaways. We demonstrate the ability to
identify independent refusal directions, revealing
that these directions correspond to distinct underlying concepts and can be directly accessed through
input manipulations. This further underscores the
utility of our representational independence framework, which provides a generalizable approach for
analyzing and understanding a wide range of representational interventions in LLMs.
Figure 8. Compositionally ablating the top–k RepInd directions
compared to ablating the DIM direction

7. Limitations

shows that when ablating the top–k RepInd directions for
Gemma 2 2B, the attack success rate increases monotonically with k, even surpassing the DIM baseline for k≥4,
though with diminishing returns beyond this point. In contrast, we found that ablating multiple DIM directions extracted from different layers does not improve performance.
The fact that ablating multiple RepInd directions produces
additive improvements in ASR provides evidence that they
capture different aspects of refusal rather than different manifestations of a single mechanism.

While our work provides new insights into the geometry
of refusal in LLMs, some limitations remain. The refusal
directions we compute are all optimized on the same targets,
which may limit their ability to capture fully distinct mechanisms. Extending our method to incorporate diverse targets
or leveraging reinforcement learning with a judge-based
reward function could help identify additional independent
mechanisms (Geisler et al., 2025). Furthermore, while we
establish the existence of higher-dimensional refusal cones,
we cannot rule out the possibility of other yet-undiscovered
regions in the model that mediate refusal.

6.2. Manipulation from input

8. Conclusion

Can we access these directions from the input? Having
found several independent directions that are distinct from
DIM, we investigate whether these directions can ever be
“used” by the model, by checking if they are accessible from
the input or if they live in regions that no combination of
input tokens activates. To this end, we use GCG (Zou et al.,
2023b) to train adversarial suffixes, which are extensions to
the prompts that aim to circumvent the safety alignment. In
addition to the standard cross–entropy loss on an affirmative
target, we add a loss term that incentivizes the suffix to
ablate RepInd–1.

This work advances the understanding of refusal mechanisms in LLMs by introducing gradient-based representation
engineering as a powerful tool for identifying and analyzing refusal directions. Our method yields more effective
refusal directions with fewer side effects, demonstrating its
viability for extracting meaningful structures while allowing
for greater modeling flexibility. We establish that refusal
behaviors can be better understood via high-dimensional
polyhedral cones in activation space rather than a single linear direction, highlighting their complex spatial structures.
Additionally, we introduce representational independence
and show that within this space of independent directions
multiple refusal directions exist and correspond to distinct
mechanisms. Our gradient-based representation engineering approach can be extended to identify various concepts
beyond refusal simply by changing the optimization targets.
The generated findings provide new insights into the geometry of aligned LLMs, highlighting the importance of
structured, gradient-based approaches in LLM interpretability and safety.

In Figure 9, we show
the cosine similarities
between RepInd–1 and
the model activations on
both harmful prompts
pharm from JAILBREAK B ENCH and the same
prompts with adversarial
suffixes padv . We observe
Figure 9. Representation of the
that GCG is able to creRepInd–1 direction in model acate suffixes that signifitivations on harmful instructions
cantly reduce how much
before and after adversarial atRepInd–1 is represented.
tacks with GCG.
These suffixes successfully jailbreak the model 36% of the time, which is similar
to the ASR of RepInd–1.

Acknowledgements
This project was conducted in collaboration with and supported by funding from Google Research. We thank Dominik Fuchsgruber and Leo Schwinn for feedback on an
early version of the manuscript.
9

The Geometry of Refusal in Large Language Models

Impact Statement

Chen, Z., Zhu, J., and Chen, A. Eliciting Offesnive Responses from Large Language Models: A Genetic Algorithm. Springer, 2024.

Understanding how refusal mechanisms in language models
work could potentially aid adversaries in developing more
effective attacks. However, our research aims to deepen the
understanding of refusal mechanisms to help the community develop more robust and reliable safety systems. By
focusing on open-source models requiring white-box access,
our findings are primarily applicable to improving defensive
capabilities rather than compromising deployed systems.
We believe the positive impact of advancing model alignment and safety through better theoretical understanding
outweighs the potential risks, making this research valuable
to share with the research community.

Clark, P., Cowhey, I., Etzioni, O., Khot, T., Sabharwal, A.,
Schoenick, C., and Tafjord, O. Think you have solved
question answering? try arc, the ai2 reasoning challenge.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.05457, 2018.
Cobbe, K., Kosaraju, V., Bavarian, M., Chen, M., Jun, H.,
Kaiser, L., Plappert, M., Tworek, J., Hilton, J., Nakano,
R., et al. Training verifiers to solve math word problems.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14168, 2021.

References
An, B., Zhu, S., Zhang, R., Panaitescu-Liess, M.-A., Xu, Y.,
and Huang, F. Automatic pseudo-harmful prompt generation for evaluating false refusals in large language models, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.
00598.
Arditi, A., Obeso, O., Syed, A., Paleka, D., Panickssery,
N., Gurnee, W., and Nanda, N. Refusal in language
models is mediated by a single direction, 2024. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.11717.

Cui, J., Chiang, W.-L., Stoica, I., and Hsieh, C.-J. Orbench: An over-refusal benchmark for large language
models, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
2405.20947.
Cunningham, H., Ewart, A., Riggs, L., Huben, R.,
and Sharkey, L. Sparse Autoencoders Find Highly
Interpretable Features in Language Models, October 2023. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2309.
08600. arXiv:2309.08600 [cs].
Dubey, A., Jauhri, A., Pandey, A., Kadian, A., Al-Dahle,
A., Letman, A., Mathur, A., Schelten, A., Yang, A., Fan,
A., et al. The llama 3 herd of models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2407.21783, 2024.

Belrose, N., Schneider-Joseph, D., Ravfogel, S., Cotterell,
R., Raff, E., and Biderman, S. Leace: Perfect linear
concept erasure in closed form, 2023. URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2306.03819.

Fiotto-Kaufman, J., Loftus, A. R., Todd, E., Brinkmann,
J., Juang, C., Pal, K., Rager, C., Mueller, A., Marks, S.,
Sharma, A. S., et al. Nnsight and ndif: Democratizing
access to foundation model internals. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2407.14561, 2024.

Bolukbasi, T., Chang, K.-W., Zou, J., Saligrama, V., and
Kalai, A. Man is to computer programmer as woman is
to homemaker? debiasing word embeddings, 2016. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/1607.06520.
Burns, C., Ye, H., Klein, D., and Steinhardt, J. Discovering latent knowledge in language models without supervision, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
2212.03827.

Gao, L., Tow, J., Abbasi, B., Biderman, S., Black, S., DiPofi,
A., Foster, C., Golding, L., Hsu, J., Le Noac’h, A., Li,
H., McDonell, K., Muennighoff, N., Ociepa, C., Phang,
J., Reynolds, L., Schoelkopf, H., Skowron, A., Sutawika,
L., Tang, E., Thite, A., Wang, B., Wang, K., and Zou,
A. A framework for few-shot language model evaluation,
07 2024. URL https://zenodo.org/records/
12608602.

Carlini, N., Nasr, M., Choquette-Choo, C. A., Jagielski, M.,
Gao, I., Awadalla, A., Koh, P. W., Ippolito, D., Lee, K.,
Tramer, F., and Schmidt, L. Are aligned neural networks
adversarially aligned?, 2024. URL https://arxiv.
org/abs/2306.15447.

Geisler, S., Wollschläger, T., Abdalla, M. H. I., Gasteiger,
J., and Günnemann, S.
Attacking Large Language Models with Projected Gradient Descent, February 2024. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2402.
09154. arXiv:2402.09154 [cs].
Geisler, S., Wollschläger, T., Abdalla, M. H. I., Gasteiger,
J., and Günnemann, S. Reinforce adversarial attacks on
large language models: An adaptive, distributional, and
semantic objective, February 2025.

Chao, P., Debenedetti, E., Robey, A., Andriushchenko, M.,
Croce, F., Sehwag, V., Dobriban, E., Flammarion, N.,
Pappas, G. J., Tramèr, F., Hassani, H., and Wong, E.
Jailbreakbench: An open robustness benchmark for jailbreaking large language models. In NeurIPS Datasets
and Benchmarks Track, 2024.

Gurnee, W. and Tegmark, M. Language models represent
space and time. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.02207, 2023.
10

The Geometry of Refusal in Large Language Models

Heinzerling, B. and Inui, K. Monotonic representation of
numeric properties in language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2403.10381, 2024.

O’Brien, K., Majercak, D., Fernandes, X., Edgar, R., Chen,
J., Nori, H., Carignan, D., Horvitz, E., and PoursabziSangde, F. Steering language model refusal with sparse
autoencoders, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/
abs/2411.11296.

Hendrycks, D., Burns, C., Basart, S., Zou, A., Mazeika,
M., Song, D., and Steinhardt, J. Measuring massive multitask language understanding. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2009.03300, 2020.

OpenAI. Introducing chatgpt, November 2022. URL
https://openai.com/blog/chatgpt/.
Accessed: 2025-01-26.

Huang, D.-S., Si, Z., and Pan, Y. (eds.). Advanced Intelligent
Computing Technology and Applications: 20th International Conference, ICIC 2024, Part III, volume 14864
of Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Springer Nature
Singapore, Singapore, 2024. ISBN 978-981-97-5587-5
978-981-97-5588-2. doi: 10.1007/978-981-97-5588-2.
URL https://link.springer.com/10.1007/
978-981-97-5588-2.

Pan, W., Liu, Z., Chen, Q., Zhou, X., Yu, H., and
Jia, X. The hidden dimensions of llm alignment:
A multi-dimensional analysis of orthogonal safety directions, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
2502.09674.
Panickssery, N., Gabrieli, N., Schulz, J., Tong, M., Hubinger,
E., and Turner, A. M. Steering Llama 2 via Contrastive
Activation Addition, July 2024. URL http://arxiv.
org/abs/2312.06681. arXiv:2312.06681 [cs].

Li, H. and Liu, X. Injecguard: Benchmarking and mitigating
over-defense in prompt injection guardrail models, 2025.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.22770.

Park, K., Choe, Y. J., and Veitch, V. The linear representation hypothesis and the geometry of large language
models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.03658, 2023.

Li, L., Dong, B., Wang, R., Hu, X., Zuo, W., Lin, D., Qiao,
Y., and Shao, J. Salad-bench: A hierarchical and comprehensive safety benchmark for large language models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.05044, 2024a.

Park, K., Choe, Y. J., and Veitch, V. The Linear Representation Hypothesis and the Geometry of Large Language
Models, July 2024. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/
2311.03658. arXiv:2311.03658 [cs].

Li, T., Wang, Z., Liu, W., Wu, M., Dou, S., Lv, C., Wang,
X., Zheng, X., and Huang, X. Revisiting jailbreaking for
large language models: A representation engineering perspective, 2024b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
2401.06824.
Lin, S., Hilton, J., and Evans, O. Truthfulqa: Measuring
how models mimic human falsehoods. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2109.07958, 2021.

Rao, A., Vashistha, S., Naik, A., Aditya, S., and
Choudhury, M. Tricking LLMs into Disobedience:
Formalizing, Analyzing, and Detecting Jailbreaks,
March 2024.
URL http://arxiv.org/abs/
2305.14965. arXiv:2305.14965 [cs].

Lin, Z., Wang, Z., Tong, Y., Wang, Y., Guo, Y., Wang, Y.,
and Shang, J. Toxicchat: Unveiling hidden challenges
of toxicity detection in real-world user-ai conversation.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.17389, 2023.

Röttger, P., Kirk, H. R., Vidgen, B., Attanasio, G., Bianchi,
F., and Hovy, D. Xstest: A test suite for identifying
exaggerated safety behaviours in large language models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.01263, 2023.

Liu, Y., Yao, Y., Ton, J.-F., Zhang, X., Cheng, R. G. H.,
Klochkov, Y., Taufiq, M. F., and Li, H. Trustworthy llms:
A survey and guideline for evaluating large language
models’ alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.05374,
2023.

Scholten, Y., Günnemann, S., and Schwinn, L. A probabilistic perspective on unlearning and alignment for large
language models. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2025.

Marks, S. and Tegmark, M. The geometry of truth: Emergent linear structure in large language model representations of true/false datasets, 2024. URL https://
arxiv.org/abs/2310.06824.

Schwinn, L., Dobre, D., Xhonneux, S., Gidel, G., and
Günnemann, S. Soft prompt threats: Attacking safety
alignment and unlearning in open-source LLMs through
the embedding space. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2024.

Nanda, N., Olah, C., Olsson, C., Elhage, N., and
Hume, T. Attribution patching: Activation patching
at industrial scale.
https://www.neelnanda.
io/mechanistic-interpretability/
attribution-patching, 2024.
Accessed:
2025-01-10.
11

Schwinn, L., Scholten, Y., Wollschläger, T., Xhonneux,
S., Casper, S., Günnemann, S., and Gidel, G. Adversarial alignment for llms requires simpler, reproducible, and more measurable objectives. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2502.11910, 2025.

The Geometry of Refusal in Large Language Models

Shah, R., Feuillade-Montixi, Q., Pour, S., Tagade, A.,
Casper, S., and Rando, J. Scalable and Transferable
Black-Box Jailbreaks for Language Models via Persona
Modulation, November 2023. URL http://arxiv.
org/abs/2311.03348. arXiv:2311.03348 [cs].
Shi, C., Wang, X., Ge, Q., Gao, S., Yang, X., Gui, T., Zhang,
Q., Huang, X., Zhao, X., and Lin, D. Navigating the
overkill in large language models, 2024. URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2401.17633.

Xie, T., Qi, X., Zeng, Y., Huang, Y., Sehwag, U. M., Huang,
K., He, L., Wei, B., Li, D., Sheng, Y., Jia, R., Li, B.,
Li, K., Chen, D., Henderson, P., and Mittal, P. Sorrybench: Systematically evaluating large language model
safety refusal, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/
abs/2406.14598.
Yang, A., Yang, B., Zhang, B., Hui, B., Zheng, B., Yu,
B., Li, C., Liu, D., Huang, F., Wei, H., et al. Qwen2. 5
technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.15115, 2024.

Souly, A., Lu, Q., Bowen, D., Trinh, T., Hsieh, E., Pandey,
S., Abbeel, P., Svegliato, J., Emmons, S., Watkins, O.,
and Toyer, S. A strongreject for empty jailbreaks, 2024.

Yu, L., Do, V., Hambardzumyan, K., and Cancedda, N.
Robust llm safeguarding via refusal feature adversarial
training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.20089, 2024.

Stolfo, A., Balachandran, V., Yousefi, S., Horvitz, E., and
Nushi, B. Improving instruction-following in language
models through activation steering, 2024. URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2410.12877.

Zheng, C., Yin, F., Zhou, H., Meng, F., Zhou, J.,
Chang, K.-W., Huang, M., and Peng, N.
On
Prompt-Driven Safeguarding for Large Language Models,
June 2024. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2401.
18018. arXiv:2401.18018 [cs].

Szegedy, C., Zaremba, W., Sutskever, I., Bruna, J., Erhan,
D., Goodfellow, I., and Fergus, R. Intriguing properties of
neural networks, 2014. URL https://arxiv.org/
abs/1312.6199.

Zhu, S., Zhang, R., An, B., Wu, G., Barrow, J., Wang, Z.,
Huang, F., Nenkova, A., and Sun, T. AutoDAN: Interpretable Gradient-Based Adversarial Attacks on Large
Language Models, December 2023. URL http://
arxiv.org/abs/2310.15140. arXiv:2310.15140
[cs].

Taori, R., Gulrajani, I., Zhang, T., Dubois, Y., Li,
X., Guestrin, C., Liang, P., and Hashimoto, T. B.
Stanford alpaca: An instruction-following llama
model.
https://github.com/tatsu-lab/
stanford_alpaca, 2023.

Zou, A., Phan, L., Chen, S., Campbell, J., Guo, P., Ren,
R., Pan, A., Yin, X., Mazeika, M., Dombrowski, A.K., Goel, S., Li, N., Byun, M. J., Wang, Z., Mallen,
A., Basart, S., Koyejo, S., Song, D., Fredrikson, M.,
Kolter, J. Z., and Hendrycks, D. Representation Engineering: A Top-Down Approach to AI Transparency, October 2023a. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2310.
01405. arXiv:2310.01405 [cs].

Team, G., Riviere, M., Pathak, S., Sessa, P. G., Hardin,
C., Bhupatiraju, S., Hussenot, L., Mesnard, T., Shahriari, B., Ramé, A., et al. Gemma 2: Improving open
language models at a practical size. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2408.00118, 2024.
Wang, K., Variengien, A., Conmy, A., Shlegeris, B., and
Steinhardt, J. Interpretability in the Wild: a Circuit for
Indirect Object Identification in GPT-2 small, November 2022. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2211.
00593. arXiv:2211.00593 [cs].

Zou, A., Wang, Z., Kolter, J. Z., and Fredrikson, M. Universal and Transferable Adversarial Attacks on Aligned
Language Models, July 2023b. URL http://arxiv.
org/abs/2307.15043. arXiv:2307.15043 [cs].

Wang, W., Tu, Z., Chen, C., Yuan, Y., Huang, J.-t., Jiao,
W., and Lyu, M. R. All languages matter: On the multilingual safety of large language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2310.00905, 2023.

Zou, A., Phan, L., Wang, J., Duenas, D., Lin, M., Andriushchenko, M., Kolter, J. Z., Fredrikson, M., and
Hendrycks, D. Improving alignment and robustness with
circuit breakers. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference
on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2024.

Wei, B., Huang, K., Huang, Y., Xie, T., Qi, X., Xia, M.,
Mittal, P., Wang, M., and Henderson, P. Assessing the
brittleness of safety alignment via pruning and low-rank
modifications, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/
abs/2402.05162.
Xhonneux, S., Sordoni, A., Günnemann, S., Gidel, G., and
Schwinn, L. Efficient adversarial training in LLMs with
continuous attacks. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2024.
12

The Geometry of Refusal in Large Language Models

A. Setup Details
A.1. Datasets
We construct our experimental dataset using harmful and harmless instructions from established benchmarks. For harmful
instructions, we draw from SALADB ENCH (Li et al., 2024a), a comprehensive collection of adversarial prompts from
diverse sources. We exclude the Multilingual (Wang et al., 2023) and ToxicChat (Lin et al., 2023) sources since they are
unsuited as harmful instructions. Afterwards, we sample up to 256 instructions from each remaining source. This results in
1,184 instructions for training and 128 for validation. We sample equal numbers of harmless instructions from the A LPACA
dataset, and additionally reserve 128 more harmless instructions for testing.
A.2. Models
We exclusively use chat models for our experiments, but omit ”IT” and ”INSTRUCT” from model names. We use each chat
model’s default chat template throughout our analysis.
Table 2. Model families, sizes, and references.

Model family

Sizes

Reference

Q WEN 2.5 I NSTRUCT
G EMMA 2 IT
L LAMA -3 I NSTRUCT

1.5B, 3B, 7B, 14B
2B, 9B
8B

Yang et al. (2024)
Team et al. (2024)
Dubey et al. (2024)

A.3. Hyperparameters and Implementation
Table 3. Hyperparameters for all algorithms

Component

Parameter

Value

Training

Total Batch Size
Gradient Accumulation Steps
Base Learning Rate
Learning Rate Reduction
Learning Rate Factor
Optimizer
Weight Decay

16
16
0.01
Every 5 batches if plateaued
Divide by 1/10 up to 2 times
AdamW
0

Main Loss

Ablation Loss Weight λabl
Addition Loss Weight λadd
Retain Loss Weight λret

1.0
0.2
1.0

Monte Carlo Sampling

Samples per Accumulation Step
Effective Samples per Batch

16
256

RepInd

RepInd Loss Weight λind
Layer Cutoff

200
0.9

Table 3 presents the hyperparameters used in our algorithms. Since our method converges before completing a full epoch,
we do not utilize validation scores during training. Instead, after convergence, we apply the direction selection algorithm
from Arditi et al. (2024) to identify the optimal refusal direction from the last 20 training steps.
Implementation and Evaluation Framework. All algorithms and exploratory experiments are implemented using the
NNsight (Fiotto-Kaufman et al., 2024) library. Additionally, we use the LM Evaluation Harness (Gao et al., 2024) to run
TruthfulQA (Lin et al., 2021) with default settings, with the exception that we enable the use of each model’s default chat
templates.
Retain and Representational Independence Loss Computation. The retain loss is computed as the KL divergence
between the probability distributions derived from the logits of the model with and without directional ablation, masked
13

The Geometry of Refusal in Large Language Models

over a target response and the last token of the chat template. The resulting value is then averaged across tokens. For a
single instruction psafe with its target tretain , we formalize the loss as follows:
Lretain = KL(fablate(r) (psafe ), f (psafe ), tretain ) =

1 XX
f (psafe + tretain )i,t
f (psafe + tretain )i,t log
,
|I|
fablate (psafe + tretain )i,t
i∈I t∈T

where I contains the target token indexes and the last instruction token’s index, the subscript i, t denotes the model output at
sequence position i and vocabulary index t as defined in Section 2, and + denotes concatenation.
For the implementation of the representational independence loss, LRepInd , we compute the average loss over the tokens
in the harmful instructions pharm . The RepInd loss is computed over the first 90% of layers, as applying it too close to the
unembedding layer overly constrains the model’s output.
Selection of Refusal and Independent Directions In Algorithm 1, after training the refusal directions to convergence, we
again use the direction selection algorithm from Arditi et al. (2024) to identify the most effective directions from the final 20
training steps.
In Section 5, we extend this selection process to determine a basis where all basis vectors effectively mediate refusal (from
the last 20 bases of the training). If no such basis exists, we instead select the basis where the samples are most effective for
directional ablation using the refusal score heuristic from the selection algorithm.
Training Procedure for Representational Independence Directions In Section 6, our approach to training and validating
representationally independent (RepInd) directions differs because of high variance between different runs. For each RepInd
direction, we train five candidate vectors and select the one with the lowest refusal score on our validation set. This process
is repeated five times, ultimately producing our final set of RepInd directions. The RepInd loss is computed as the sum of
losses over all vectors that the current vector should remain independent of.

14

The Geometry of Refusal in Large Language Models

B. Extended Results for Refusal Direction Optimization
In this section, we present additional results, including results for activation addition, more datasets for directional ablation,
and more benchmarks.
B.1. Activation Addition
We first confirm that our directions can also be used to induce refusal. Figure 10 demonstrates that using RDO refusal
directions for activation addition successfully induces refusal behavior across all models for both DIM and RDO, and RDO
slightly outperforms DIM for most models.

Figure 10. Refusal scores of different models on harmless instructions after activation addition that aims to induce refusal.

B.2. Directional Ablation on Additional Datasets
For a more robust evaluation of how the RDO directions compare to DIM in terms of performance, we additionally evaluate
directional ablation ASR on S TRONG REJECT(Souly et al., 2024) and the SORRY-B ENCH base dataset (Xie et al., 2025).
We include baseline performance here without any intervention. The results are shown in Figure 11, Figure 12, and Figure 13,
and confirm that our findings transfer across datasets.

Figure 11. Attack success rates of refusal directions on S TRONG REJECT.

15

The Geometry of Refusal in Large Language Models

Figure 12. Attack success rates of refusal directions on SORRY-B ENCH.

Figure 13. Attack success rates of refusal directions on JAILBREAK B ENCH.

16

The Geometry of Refusal in Large Language Models

B.3. Benchmarks
In Table 1 we showed that RDO directions have significantly lower side-effects on model performance as measured via
the reduction in T RUTHFUL QA score. Here, we show the change in benchmark scores for more benchmarks, specifically
ARC (Clark et al., 2018), GSM8K (Cobbe et al., 2021), and MMLU (Hendrycks et al., 2020). In Table 4, we see that for
most combinations of model and benchmark, the RDO direction has less impact on benchmark score, which confirms the
effectiveness of our retain loss and that the RDO directions manipulate refusal more precisely. Finally, we summarize all
results in Table 5.
Table 4. Sides effect measured by comparing model performance on benchmark datasets when ablating with either DIM or RDO. Ablating
RDO has significantly lower side effects for most models and benchmarks.

Dataset

Model

DIM

RDO

Change

TruthfulQA MC2

Gemma 2 2B
Gemma 2 9B
Llama 3 8B
Qwen 2.5 1.5B
Qwen 2.5 7B
Qwen 2.5 14B

8.0%
8.3%
4.1%
3.6%
4.4%
7.5%

4.4%
4.4%
1.8%
2.6%
3.1%
2.5%

(-3.6%)
(-3.9%)
(-2.3%)
(-1.1%)
(-1.2%)
(-5.0%)

ARC CHALLENGE

Gemma 2 2B
Gemma 2 9B
Llama 3 8B
Qwen 2.5 1.5B
Qwen 2.5 7B
Qwen 2.5 14B

0.2%
0.6%
1.0%
0.7%
0.9%
1.5%

0.2%
0.3%
0.2%
0.3%
0.0%
0.6%

(-0.0%)
(-0.3%)
(-0.9%)
(-0.4%)
(-0.9%)
(-0.9%)

GSM8K

Gemma 2 2B
Gemma 2 9B
Llama 3 8B
Qwen 2.5 1.5B
Qwen 2.5 7B
Qwen 2.5 14B

0.6%
0.1%
1.0%
1.1%
0.8%
1.5%

0.4%
0.3%
2.7%
0.0%
0.7%
0.5%

(-0.2%)
(+0.2%)
(+1.7%)
(-1.1%)
(-0.2%)
(-1.1%)

MMLU

Gemma 2 2B
Gemma 2 9B
Llama 3 8B
Qwen 2.5 1.5B
Qwen 2.5 7B
Qwen 2.5 14B

0.3%
1.3%
2.6%
1.5%
0.7%
1.2%

1.2%
0.1%
0.1%
0.5%
0.1%
0.3%

(+1.0%)
(-1.2%)
(-2.5%)
(-1.0%)
(-0.6%)
(-0.9%)

17

The Geometry of Refusal in Large Language Models

Table 5. Comparing RDO and DIM in terms of jailbreaking effectiveness and how jailbreaking affects general capability benchmarks.
Each cell in the jailbreaking section contain pairs of ASRs: the first for directional ablation and the second for activation subtraction. The
values in the general capability section are computed under directional ablation of the respective directions.
Jailbreaking

General Capability

JailbreakBench
ASR ↑

StrongREJECT
ASR ↑

SORRY-Bench
ASR ↑

MMLU
Acc ↑

ARC-C
Acc ↑

GSM8K
Acc ↑

TruthfulQA
Acc ↑

G EMMA 2 2B
DIM
RDO

2.5
78.6 / 71.2
79.9 / 69.5

1.0
80.7 / 74.6
80.5 / 71.4

10.4
71.0 / 66.3
69.5 / 63.3

30.5
30.3
29.3

42.7
42.5
42.8

52.3
52.9
52.7

55.8
47.8
51.4

G EMMA 2 9B
DIM
RDO

0.3
79.1 / 68.3
76.8 / 73.0

0.6
80.2 / 82.7
77.7 / 75.4

7.8
69.1 / 69.0
68.1 / 66.3

34.8
36.1
34.7

52.6
53.2
52.2

74.7
74.6
75.0

61.1
52.8
56.7

L LAMA 3 8B
DIM
RDO

2.9
79.7 / 74.1
80.3 / 79.0

1.2
81.5 / 81.4
83.8 / 84.7

14.0
73.0 / 73.4
74.4 / 73.2

58.1
55.5
58.2

48.6
47.6
48.5

63.5
62.5
66.2

52.8
48.7
51.0

Q WEN 2.5 1.5B
DIM
RDO

0.4
53.1 / 55.0
53.5 / 65.2

3.1
65.2 / 60.4
61.3 / 71.3

9.2
52.5 / 53.0
49.1 / 60.1

58.3
56.8
57.8

38.5
37.8
38.7

56.4
55.3
56.4

46.5
42.9
44.0

Q WEN 2.5 3B
DIM
RDO

8.4
68.5 / 54.9
67.6 / 54.8

6.9
72.2 / 64.1
73.6 / 55.9

16.7
64.8 / 55.6
63.6 / 55.0

64.6
64.5
64.7

42.8
42.7
41.6

61.2
60.3
59.5

57.2
54.2
54.5

Q WEN 2.5 7B
DIM
RDO

9.1
69.2 / 71.0
69.3 / 72.0

7.1
68.8 / 74.1
70.0 / 74.8

22.7
63.1 / 64.8
63.4 / 66.7

68.8
68.1
68.7

45.6
46.5
45.6

77.9
77.0
77.2

63.1
58.7
60.0

Q WEN 2.5 14B
DIM
RDO

4.9
76.2 / 66.6
75.7 / 75.6

2.9
80.8 / 70.7
79.9 / 76.2

17.9
69.6 / 60.0
69.0 / 66.2

76.9
75.7
76.6

52.8
51.4
52.2

81.7
80.2
81.3

70.8
63.4
67.9

18

The Geometry of Refusal in Large Language Models

C. Ablation Studies
We conduct ablation studies to determine the importance of the three losses in our RDO algorithm.
C.1. Addition and Ablation Loss
We first study how the addition and ablation loss should be balanced. We experiment with the Llama-3-8B-Instruct model
and range the loss weights λabl and λadd from 0 to 1, setting λabl = 1 − λadd to balance the weights. We then evaluate
attack success rates for both directional ablation and activation subtraction interventions. Figure 14 shows that both loss
components are essential for optimal performance. ASR is similar across the 0.2–0.8 weight range, where both methods
maintain consistently high attack success rates above 80%, and choosing only one of the losses reduces performance
significantly. This finding indicates that while including both loss terms is critical, the precise weight allocation within this
range has minimal impact on effectiveness. This robustness simplifies hyperparameter tuning in practice, as practitioners
can select any weight configuration within this range without substantially affecting performance.

Figure 14. Ablation study of loss weights λabl and λadd for Llama-3-8B-Instruct. We compare attack success rates for directional ablation
and activation subtraction across different weight balances (λabl = 1 − λadd ). Both methods perform well in the 0.2–0.8 range, with severe
degradation at extremes, particularly for directional ablation using only the addition loss (20% ASR at λadd = 1).

C.2. Retain Loss
Regarding the impact of using the retain loss to minimize side-effects when intervening with our refusal directions, we
conduct an ablation study of the retain loss weight λret for Qwen2.5-3B-Instruct. We fix the ablation and addition loss
weights to their default values (see Table 3) and systematically vary λret . Figure 15 presents a Pareto analysis plotting ASR
under directional ablation against the average reduction in benchmark performance that results from directional ablation. In
more detail, the x-axis represents the average change in benchmark scores when intervening with the refusal direction across
GSM8K, MMLU, ARC-Challenge, and TruthfulQA relative to the model’s baseline performance (no intervention), while
the y-axis shows the corresponding JAILBREAK B ENCH ASR under directional ablation. The ideal refusal direction would
maximize ASR while maintaining or improving benchmark performance (e.g., by preventing the model from inappropriately
refusing legitimate questions).
For this specific model, retain weights up to λret = 4 increasingly reduce side-effects on benchmark performance with only
marginal ASR reduction. However, beyond this threshold, the ASR drops drastically, indicating that excessive weighting of
19

The Geometry of Refusal in Large Language Models

Figure 15. Ablation study of retain loss weight λretain for Qwen2.5-3B-Instruct. We plot JailbreakBench ASR versus benchmark performance change (x-axis, averaged over GSM8K, MMLU, ARC-Challenge, TruthfulQA) when intervening with the direction compared
to baseline. Higher retain weights improve benchmark preservation with minimal ASR loss up to λretain = 4, after which ASR drops
significantly. Multiple hyperparameter choices Pareto-dominate the DIM baseline, demonstrating robust improvements over current
state-of-the-art.

the retain loss impedes the learning of effective refusal directions.
Importantly, we observe that multiple hyperparameter configurations achieve Pareto dominance over the DIM baseline
across both metrics. This demonstrates that our method provides robust improvements over the current state-of-the-art,
rather than gains limited to specific hyperparameter choices.

20

The Geometry of Refusal in Large Language Models

D. Flexibility of Algorithms
We find that DIM can struggle to identify refusal directions with sufficiently low side-effects (according to the heuristic used
by Arditi et al. (2024). Figure 16 visualizes the effectiveness of the direction selection algorithm from Arditi et al. (2024)
for DIM directions in the Qwen 2.5 7B model. Among the evaluated token and layer pairs, only one direction is found to be
effective for both inducing refusal through activation addition and maintaining low side effects. Transparent data points
indicate (layer, token) combinations that were filtered out due to their inability to induce refusal reliably. Additionally, the
red line represents the KL-divergence threshold, used to estimate potential side effects of directional ablation on harmless
instructions.

Figure 16. Analysis of the selection direction algorithm from Arditi et al. (2024) for the DIM directions of Qwen 2.5 7B. Among the
token and layer combinations, only a single direction is identified as viable for both inducing refusal via activation addition and having
low side-effects. Transparent points represent (layer, token) pairs that are filtered out because of ineffectiveness in inducing refusal. The
red line indicates the KL-divergence threshold used to estimate potential side-effects of directional ablation on harmless instructions.

21

The Geometry of Refusal in Large Language Models

E. Extended Results for Refusal Cones
In Figure 17 we show the refusal cones for the Gemma model family.

Figure 17. Attack success rates in refusal cones of different dimensions for the Gemma 2 model family. We observe that for the Gemma 2
2B the lower bounds start to degrade significantly for dimension 5.

In Figure 18 we measure the performance of the refusal cones in the Qwen 2.5 model family for activation addition. The
models tend to support higher dimensional cones compared to Figure 4, revealing that inducing refusal is significantly easier
than disabling refusal via directional ablation. Notably, most directions even in high-dimensional cones remain effective at
inducing refusal responses.

Figure 18. Using refusal cones to induce refusal across various Qwen 2.5 models with different dimensions. We observe that inducing
refusal is generally easier than executing an attack. In this setting, nearly all dimensions maintain strong performance in eliciting refusal
responses.

Figure 19 examines the attack success rate when sampling multiple vectors from various N -dimensional refusal cones
and selecting the best-performing sample per prompt for Gemma 2, 2B. We observe that ASR improves with increasing
cone dimensionality but plateaus at four dimensions, suggesting that higher-dimensional cones provide an advantage over
single-direction manipulation by capturing complementary mechanisms. The plateau likely results from the model’s inability
to encode higher-dimensional refusal cones, a hypothesis further supported by Figure 17.
22

The Geometry of Refusal in Large Language Models

Figure 19. Attack success rates when sampling vectors from the N-dimensional refusal cones and selecting the best-performing sample
per prompt for Gemma 2 2B. ASR increases with cone dimensionality but plateaus at four dimensions, suggesting that higher-dimensional
cones provide an advantage over single-direction manipulation by capturing complementary mechanisms. The plateau likely arises
because Algorithm 2 cannot find an additional basis vector that preserves the refusal properties in the cone, suggesting that the model does
not support a cone of this dimension. Figure 17 also provides evidence for this claim.

Figure 20. Refusal scores of refusal vectors sampled from Gemma 2 2B refusal cones compared to the DIM direction when scaling the
norm of the added direction α for the activation addition intervention. The refusal score is the heuristic from Arditi et al. (2024) here, and
we compute it on 64 harmful validation instructions, with mean and standard deviation over 64 samples per alpha.

23

The Geometry of Refusal in Large Language Models

F. Orthogonal Refusal Directions
In Figure 6 we showed how the orthogonal RDO⊥ interacts with the DIM direction. Here, we show the result for two
additional models, on a larger dataset (SORRY-B ENCH). Figure 22 supports that the DIM direction is greatly influenced by
ablating orthogonal refusal directions, supporting our claims in Section 6.1.

Figure 21. Interaction of orthogonal refusal directions directions under directional ablation, measured in terms of cosine similarity to
model activations at the last token position on harmful instructions from SORRY-B ENCH, across different models.

24

The Geometry of Refusal in Large Language Models

G. Over-refusal
We evaluate the trade-off between over-refusal and safety by analyzing activation addition of the RDO and DIM directions
across different strength configurations for the Gemma 2 2B model. Figure 22 shows results for activation addition strengths
(α) ranging from 0 to ||v||2 , where we compute refusal scores on two distinct datasets: harmful instructions from SORRYB ENCH and harmless instructions from XST EST (Röttger et al., 2023). Higher scores on SORRY-B ENCH indicate safer
responses to genuinely harmful prompts, while lower scores on XST EST indicate reduced over-refusal on benign inputs that
are designed to measure inappropriate refusal behavior. Our method consistently provides better or equivalent trade-offs
compared to DIM across all strength configurations, suggesting that RDO directions may be more suited for increasing
safety at the same rate of over-refusal compared to DIM.

Figure 22. Trade-off between over-refusal and safety for different activation addition strengths of our refusal directions.

25

The Geometry of Refusal in Large Language Models

H. Assets
In the following, we show the licenses for all the assets we used in this work: different models from Table 6 and the datasets
that we use for evaluation and training; see Table 7.
H.1. Models
Table 6. The list of models used in this work.

Model
Qwen 2.5 {1.5B, 7B, 14B}
Qwen 2.5 {3B}
Gemma 2 2B
Gemma 2 9B
Llama-3 8B
StrongREJECT Judge

Source
Yang et al. (2024)
Yang et al. (2024)
Team et al. (2024)
Team et al. (2024)
Dubey et al. (2024)
Souly et al. (2024)

Accessed via
Link
Link
Link
Link
Link
Link

License
Apache 2.0 License
Qwen Research License
Apache 2.0 License
Gemma Terms of Use
Meta Llama 3 Community License
MIT License

H.2. Datasets
Table 7. The list of datasets used in this work.

Dataset
SALADB ENCH
A LPACA
JAILBREAK B ENCH
S TRONG REJECT
SORRY-B ENCH
XST EST
T RUTHFUL QA
MMLU
ARC
GSM8K

Source
Li et al. (2024a)
Taori et al. (2023)
Chao et al. (2024)
Souly et al. (2024)
Xie et al. (2025)
Röttger et al. (2023)
Lin et al. (2021)
Hendrycks et al. (2020)
Clark et al. (2018)
Cobbe et al. (2021)

26

Accessed via
Link
Link
Link
Link
Link
Link
Link
Link
Link
Link

License
Apache License 2.0
Apache License 2.0
MIT License
MIT License
Custom License
CC-BY-4.0
Apache License 2.0
MIT License
CC-BY-SA-4.0
MIT License

